 
‘This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.’ 
Functional flower traits and their diversity drive pollinator visitation 
Felix Fornoff1, Alexandra-Maria Klein1, Florian Hartig2, Gita Benadi3, Christine 
Venjakob4, H. Martin Schaefer5 and Anne Ebeling6 
1Faculty of Environment and Natural Resources, Nature Conservation and Landscape 
Ecology, Univ. of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany 
2Faculty of Biology and Pre-Clinical Medicine, Theoretical Ecology, Univ. of 
Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany 
3Faculty of Environment and Natural Resources, Biometry and Environmental System 
Analysis, Univ. of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany 
4Inst. of Ecology, Ecosystem Functions, Leuphana Univ. of Lüneburg, Lüneburg, 
Germany 
5Inst. of Biology I, Evolutionary Biology and Animal Ecology, Faculty of Biology, 
Univ. of Freiburg, Germany 
6Inst. of Ecology, Univ. of Jena, Jena, Germany 
Corresponding author: F. Fornoff, Faculty of Environment and Natural Resources, 
Nature Conservation and Landscape Ecology, Univ. of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. E-
mail: felix.fornoff@nature.uni-freiburg.de 
Decision date: 23-Nov-2016 
 
 
This article has been accepted for publication and undergone full peer review but has 
not been through the copyediting, typesetting, pagination and proofreading process, 
which may lead to differences between this version and the Version of Record. Please 
cite this article as doi: [10.1111/oik.03869]. 
 
 
 
Accepted Article

 
‘This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.’ 
(Summary) 
Recent studies have shown that the diversity of flowering plants can enhance pollinator 
richness and visitation frequency and thereby increase the resilience of pollination. It is 
assumed that flower traits explain these effects, but it is still unclear which flower traits 
are responsible, and knowing that, if pollinator richness and visitation frequency are 
more driven by mass-ratio effects (mean trait values) or by trait diversity. 
Here, we analyse a three-year data set of pollinator observations collected in a 
European grassland plant diversity experiment (The Jena experiment). The data entail 
comprehensive flower trait measurements, including reward traits (nectar and pollen 
amount), morphological traits (height, symmetry, area, colour spectra), and chemical 
traits (nectar-amino acid and nectar-sugar concentration). We test if pollinator species 
richness and visitation frequency of flower communities depend on overall functional 
diversity combining all flower traits within a community, single trait diversities (within 
trait variation) and community-weighted means of the single traits, using Bayesian 
inference. 
Overall functional diversity did not affect pollinator species richness, but 
reduced visitation frequency. When looking at individual flower traits separately, we 
found that single trait diversity of flower reflectance and flower morphology were 
important predictors of pollinator visitation frequency. Moreover, independent of total 
flower abundance, community-weighted means of flower height, area, reflectance, 
nectar-sugar concentration and nectar-amino acid concentration strongly affected both 
pollinator species richness and visitation frequency.  
Our results, challenge the idea that functional diversity always positively affects 
ecosystem functions. Nonetheless, we demonstrate that both single trait diversity and 
mass-ratio effects of flower traits play an important role for diverse and frequent flower 
visits, which underlines the functionality of flower traits for pollination services. 
 
 
Accepted Article

 
‘This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.’ 
Introduction 
Human activities alter global ecosystems, often with the consequence of decreasing 
species diversity (Cardinale et al. 2012; Naeem et al. 2012). Many studies have found 
that the resulting loss of functional diversity has negative effects on ecosystem 
functions and services provided by these systems (e.g. Hooper and Vitousek 1997; 
Tilman et al. 1997; Bunker et al. 2005). Understanding the key dimensions of functional 
diversity that maintain ecosystem functioning is therefore of great interest, both from a 
practical and scientific viewpoint.  
Two mechanisms are widely discussed for explaining trait effects on ecosystem 
functioning (Dias et al. 2013): (1) diversity effects influencing ecosystem functions via 
complementarity or nonadditive effects (synergism, antagonism) (Callaway 1995), (2) 
mass-ratio effects, traits expressed by the most abundant species within a community 
dominate ecosystem functions, represented by community-weighted means (CWM) 
(Hector 1998; Grime 1998). We are only beginning to understand general patterns with 
respect to these mechanisms, and the mechanisms that mediate these effects are still 
understudied for many important ecosystems. Moreover, many ecosystem functions 
depend on trophic interactions, but the majority of studies investigating trait effects on 
ecosystem functions focus on one trophic level (Hooper et al. 2005; Bello et al. 2010). 
Plant-pollinator systems are key trophic interactions fuelling plant reproduction. They 
strongly respond to changes in biodiversity and are subject to substantial alterations of 
diversity and community composition by human interventions. Previous studies found 
that plant species richness increases pollinator species richness and visitation frequency 
(Ebeling et al. 2008; Fründ et al. 2010). Frequent and diverse visitations will likely 
increase pollination success (Brittain et al. 2013, Fründ et al. 2013, Garibaldi et al. 
2013).  
Accepted Article

 
‘This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.’ 
For comprehensibility, we use the term pollinator for all flower visitors, though it needs 
to be mentioned that not every flower visitation event results in the transfer of pollen 
(King et al. 2013). 
Different pollinators prefer distinct floral traits, or are excluded by them (Blüthgen and 
Klein 2011). It is generally assumed that diverse plant communities attract a more 
species rich pollinator community because they provide a higher diversity of flower 
traits that allow more pollinator species to coexist via niche partitioning (McGill et al. 
2006). Junker et al. (2015), who simulated pollinator – flower interactions, found that 
species richness of pollinators increases with overall functional diversity of plant 
communities and we expected to find the same pattern. Additionally, we expected a 
negative effect of overall functional diversity of all flower traits in a community (FDQ) 
on visitation frequency at the plant community level, as the most abundant pollinators in 
our data set were generalists. For generalists high FDQ requires changes in, for example, 
search (low flowers within the vegetation layer vs. high flowers above the vegetation 
layer) and handling (tubular vs. open flowers) behaviour which are likely to decrease 
exploitation efficiency and plant community visitation frequency (Cakmak et al. 2009). 
Combining both, we hypothesize that increasing FDQ increases pollinator species 
richness, but decreases visitation frequency of plant communities (HI, Figure 1A).  
The diversity of expressions within each single trait and its effect on pollinators needs 
to be evaluated to identify the traits that likely cause the FDQ effect. Positive effects on 
pollinator diversity have been suggested for diversity in flower morphology, flower 
height and pollen amount, though in independent studies (e.g.; Yoshioka et al. 2007; 
Junker et al. 2013, 2015). A comprehensive analysis of the diversity effect of flower 
traits is still missing. We expected that for each functional trait the diversity of trait 
expressions (FDtrait) within a flower community should increase pollinator species 
Accepted Article

 
‘This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.’ 
richness and decrease visitation frequency by the same mechanisms as described for 
FDQ. 
The mass-ratio hypothesis postulates that the dominant trait expressions have the 
strongest effect on the function of interest (Hector 1998; Grime 1998). Flower visitation 
frequency is frequently driven by the most frequent pollinators, generally the social 
bees. These groups of bees are known to be polylectic, though individuals of e.g. 
bumble bees develop flower constancy to specialize on profitable abundant flowers 
(Chittka et al. 1999). Direct traits that represent pollen or nectar rich flowers, e.g. sugar, 
nectar and pollen, or indirect traits, e.g. colour or height, could act as attractors for these 
species. Accordingly, pollinator visitation frequency should be increased by high 
relative values (mass-ratio) of the most attractive trait expressions in flower 
communities.  
A limitation of many of the existing studies is that they are either of theoretical nature, 
or that they use only a subset of traits. Consequently, the inherent importance of flower 
traits, and whether diversity or mass-ratio effects are driving pollinator diversity, is 
currently not well understood. Dias et al. (2013) proposed that in order to disentangle 
the effects of functional diversity and community composition (mass-ratio) both should 
be considered within the same analysis. Few examples follow this approach and the 
majority identifies mass-ratio effects as main driver (Díaz et al. 2007; Mokany et al. 
2008; Schumacher and Roscher 2009; Lavorel et al. 2011; Mouillot et al. 2011; 
Laughlin 2011, but see Schuldt et al. 2014). In our study we therefore distinguish mass-
ratio effects represented by trait community-weighted mean (CWM) and single trait 
diversity (FDtrait) effects within one regression model.  
We hypothesise, that community-weighted mean trait values influence flower visitation 
frequency, but flower community FDtrait has a negative effect on visitation frequency 
(HII, Figure 1B). Furthermore, pollinator species richness of a plant community may be 
Accepted Article

 
‘This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.’ 
affected by trait effects and additionally increases with sample size. As such, pollinator 
species richness is correlated with visitation frequency and therefore, should respond to 
the same CWMs as visitation frequency. We therefore formulate as third hypothesis that 
pollinator species richness responds to flower community single trait diversity (FDtrait) 
as well as trait community-weighted mean (HIII, Figure 1B). 
Methods 
Experimental design and pollinator flower observations 
Data were collected at “The Jena Experiment” (Thuringia, Germany; 50°55’N, 11°35’E; 
130 m a.s.l., Figure A1), a grassland diversity experimental site established in 2002. The 
experiment consists of communities of common European grassland species sown in 82 
20x20m plots arranged in a regular grid. Species composition was maintained by 
weeding of invading plant species. The diversity gradient consists of 16 treatment plots 
each for monocultures, two-species mixtures, four-species mixtures and eight-species 
mixtures, 14 treatment plots of 16-species mixtures and four treatment plots of 60 
species mixtures. Each mixture was compiled randomly (except for 60 species mixtures 
containing all species). For more details on the realized species and the general set up of 
the Jena Experiment see Roscher et al. (2004). 
Observations of flower-pollinator interactions and blossom cover were recorded; each 
flower-visiting insect and the visited plant species was documented at species level. 
Unknown pollinator species were captured for later identification. In 2008 all 82 plots 
(including not weeded only grass plots) were included into the analyses, but only 73 in 
2005 and 2006, due to non-flowering of the remaining 9 plots (only grass plots). Data 
collection in 2005 and 2006 consisted of three surveys of 6min per plot, each within a 
square of 80x80cm (25th May, 16th June, 19th August and 10th June, 18th June, 5th 
August, respectively; Ebeling et al. 2008). In 2008 four surveys of 6min per plot were 
Accepted Article

 
‘This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.’ 
conducted (05th May, 01st June, 16th July, 6th August; Hudewenz et al. 2012), 
resulting in 766 plot observations (3 times x 73 plots in 2005 + 3 times x 73 plots in 
2006 + 4 times x 82 plots in 2008) and overall 4596 minutes observation time. Blossom 
cover was estimated for each plant species after each pollinator observation as 
percentage cover of the total flower area of sampled core areas.  
Flower traits 
During the whole observation period we found 44 of the 60 plant species in flower and 
conducted trait measurements for all of these species, although nectar extraction was not 
possible for all species (see Appendix 1 Methods A1). Traits ranged from flower 
reflectance, height and inflorescence area to sugar and amino acid content of nectar (for 
a full list of all 13 traits, see Table 1). All traits were measured on ten blossoms of 
different plant individuals from the monoculture plots at the experimental field sites 
during the vegetation period in 2011. In order to determine blossom colour, we 
measured light reflectance spectra using AvaSpec-2048 Fiber Optic Spectrometer and 
an AvaLight-XE as a standardized light source (both Avantes, RB Eerbeek, The 
Netherlands). Since we have no information on the visual perception range for all 
pollinators recorded we classified the spectra into four binomial categories (400-680nm 
each category 70nm), blue, green, yellow and red (spectra show local maxima at the 
respective range), e.g. purple flowers obtain the value 0 for green and yellow and 1 for 
blue and red. UV reflectance was taken from the database BiolFlor (www.biolflor.de; 
Klotz et al. 2002), which assigns the numbers from one to seven to ranges of reflectance 
intensity (one = 0-7%, two = 8-15%, three = 16-27%, four = 28-39%, five = 40-66%, 
six = 67-85%, seven = 85-100%; Klotz et al. 2002). Flower height and inflorescence 
area were measured using a calliper. Flower height is the distance between the flower 
and the surface. Flower area was calculated for floral units (FU), an aggregation of 
flowers which a pollinator can access without flying (individual flower of single 
Accepted Article

 
‘This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.’ 
flowering species e.g. Ranunculus acris L. or full flower stand of composite flowers of 
e.g. Leontodon autumnalis L.) or whole umbel including several blossoms (Heracleum 
sphondylium L. or pseudo umbels of Achillea millefolium L.). For round FUs area (A) is 
calculated by A = pi*r²  for non-round FUs we assumed a rectangle and calculated 
length x width (e.g. for Lathyrus pratensis, with of FU x height of FU). Flower 
symmetry was also judged based on FUs not the individual flower, seen from the side to 
which the flower opens, for e.g. Asteraceae and Apiaceae: radial symmetry, Fabaceae: 
lateral symmetry. Nectar content (nectar production) was measured using glass 
capillaries on overnight gauze bagged flowers in the morning between 6 to 12 am. The 
same nectar was used for sugar content (sucrose, fructose and glucose) and amino acid 
(alanine, arginine, aspartic acid, cystine, glutamic acid, glycine, histidine, isoleucine, 
leucine, lysine, methionine, phenylalanine, proline, serine, threonine, tyrosine, valine) 
analysis via HPLC. Pollen amount was categorized into little/high pollen availability. 
Details of the nectar and pollen collection and chemical analyses are in the 
Supplementary material Appendix 1 Methods A1. The flowering length (in days) was 
measured, by daily investigation of marked FUs. Stamen number and location of 
individual flowers or florets were determined in the field and supplemented using the 
plant identification book Rothmaler (Jäger et al. 2013). BiolFlor data base (Klotz et al. 
2002) was used to complement the trait information of nectar amount for 6 plant species 
and for colour of one species, since no measurements in the field were taken for this 
plants and traits. 
Statistical analyses 
Of the 766 plot observations, 231 observations did not have a single blossom in flower. 
Diversity cannot sensibly be calculated for these plots and they were therefore excluded 
(see also Austin and Meyers 1996). Additionally, 49 observations did not have 
sufficient information to calculate total amino acid single trait diversity, due to 
Accepted Article

 
‘This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.’ 
insufficient amounts of nectar sampled for chemical analyses and were also excluded. 
Hence, our total sample size available for statistical analysis comprised 486 plots. 
Two response variables, pollinator visitation rate and species richness, and all trait 
indices were calculated on the plot level to analyse the trait effects of flower 
communities on pollinator communities. Functional diversity was calculated using the 
function dbFD of the R package ‘FD’ in the software R (R Development Core Team 
2014; Laliberté et al. 2014). We used the index of functional diversity based on the 
quadratic entropy of Rao (1982) that incorporates both the relative abundances of 
species (in our study: blossom cover) and a measure of the pairwise functional 
differences between species as suggested by Botta-Dukát (2005) 
   ∑
∑
       
 
     
   
   
  
(1) 
where dij is the difference between the ith and jth species and pi is the proportion of the 
species i of the total community. As suggested by Botta-Dukát we use Euclidean 
distance divided by the number of traits 
    
 
 ∑
(       )
 
 
   
  
(2) 
where n is the number of traits considered, Xik is the value of trait k in species i.  
Trait selection was based on their assumed importance for flower-pollinator 
interactions. Table 1 shows these traits, their unit, range and data structure. All traits 
listed in Table 1 (n = 13) were included to calculate overall trait diversity (FDQ) using 
formula (1). Each trait was individually used (n = 1) in formula (1) to calculate single 
trait diversity (FDtrait).  
In addition to trait diversity, we calculated community-weighted means (CWM) for 
each individual trait. CWM values express the abundance-weighted mean values of 
numerical variables or the percentage of relative abundance of each factor level of 
categorical variables, where n is the number of species in a community, pi is the 
Accepted Article

 
‘This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.’ 
proportion of the species i of the total community and trait the trait value of the species 
i. 
    ∑
        
 
   
  
(3) 
All parameters were standardized by subtracting their mean value and dividing by their 
standard deviation. Therefore, effect sizes are more comparable, but should not be 
interpreted as relative to their natural units. Prior to statistical analysis, all covariates 
were investigated for collinearity and variables with correlation values higher than 0.65 
were excluded from the model (for an overview see Supplementary material Appendix 1 
Fig. A1 & A2) (Dormann et al. 2013), but will be discussed accordingly. FDtrait and FDQ 
indices were correlated to varying amounts, therefore it was necessary to explore the 
effects of both in separate models. Zero-inflation and overdispersion are common for 
this type of pollinator count data and therefore we modelled the responses (pollinator 
species richness and visitation frequency) with zero-inflated Poisson generalized linear 
mixed effects models (ZIP GLMM) with covariates depending on our respective 
hypotheses. Model parameterisation is shown in Equation 1. 
Equation 1: Zero-inflated Poisson generalized linear mixed effects model 
The models used for testing hypothesis I were: 
 (1.1)  
Species richness ~ ZIP (cover + FDQ + Random) 
 (1.2)  
Visitation frequency ~ ZIP (cover + FDQ + Random) 
The models used for testing hypothesis II and III were: 
 (2.1)  
Species richness ~ ZIP (cover 
+ trait1-CWM +…+ traiti-CWM  
 
# 
CWM part 
+ trait1- FDtrait +…+ traiti- FDtrait  
 
# FD 
part 
+ Random)  
 (2.2)  
Visitation frequency ~ ZIP (cover + trait1-CWM +…+ traiti-CWM  
# CWM part 
+ trait1- FDtrait +…+ traiti- FDtrait  
 
# FD 
part 
+ Random) 
Accepted Article

 
‘This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.’ 
The general structure of a ZIP GLMM is given in Equation 2.  
Equation 2: Mathematical model of the two-way nested Zero-Inflated-Poisson GLMM 
yijk ~ ZIP (λijk x Iijk) 
log (λijk) = α + β1 x m1
ijk + β2 x m2
ijk + . . . + εijk + uj + vjk 
Iijk ~ Bernoulli (Z) 
εijk ~ Normal (0, O) 
uj ~ Normal (0, σPlot) 
vk ~ Normal (0, σSurvey) 
The response (y) is dependent on λ calculated by the linear regression with parameters; 
intercept (α), prior (βl), predictor variable (ml) and the random terms (ε, u and v); 
overdispersion (O) and the incidence of a non-zero observation (I). The random terms 
(u and v) in the model included survey ID (Levels 1 to 10) nested within plots (levels 1 
to 82) representing the experimental design and an overdispersion parameter (O). We 
expected the variance between sampling seasons to be greater than the variance between 
years, therefore we did not include year as a random term but expected the random term 
season to also capture variation between years. We specified mildly informative priors 
(mean=0, sigma=10) for the main effects. This technique, also known as the “Bayesian 
Lasso”, avoids overfitting in complex models (Park and Casella 2008). One advantage 
of this method over AIC-based model selection is that it is more conservative regarding 
effect sizes, due to preference for low effect sizes introduced by the prior. In contrast, 
AIC-based model selection can lead to overestimation of effects, particularly when 
predictors are collinear.  
Bayesian posteriors for the models were estimated using JAGS 3.4.0 and the R-
packages: rjags (Plummer; Plummer and Stukalov 2014) and jagsUI (Kellner 2015). 
MCMC chains were considered converged at Rhat values (Potential scale reduction 
factor) <1.05 (Gelman et al. 2003). A Bayesian analysis does not provide p-values for 
Accepted Article

 
‘This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.’ 
effect sizes, but the posterior distribution that is calculated can still be intuitively 
interpreted: it provides the probability that the effect is positive or negative. Note that 
the p-value is often misinterpreted as exactly this probability (Cohen 1994). We 
considered model parameters with 95% credible intervals on either positive or negative 
value as substantial evidence for an effect towards positive and negative values, 
respectively. Note that the p-value is often misinterpreted as exactly this probability 
(Cohen 1994).  
Results 
Pollinator community and community overall functional diversity (FDQ) 
In total 67 species of pollinators (17 solitary bees, 24 social bees (one Apis, two 
Halictus, six Bombus, 15 Lasioglossum), 21 Syrphidae and five wasps of unknown 
genus) were visiting blossoms of 44 plant species. Species richness of pollinators and 
plant species within individual plots and censuses ranged from zero to six and zero to 
14, respectively. The data consisted of 6450 individual observations (6191 bees), of 
which 3982 observations belonged to Apis mellifera, 1888 Bombus, 230 syrphids, 136 
solitary and semi-social bees, and 29 wasps. Wild bees represented 61% and syrphids 
30% of the overall species. Two bee species were specialized on a single plant family, 
but both were observed only once. All other species were flower generalists, hence visit 
flowers of a variety of different plant families (Westrich 1990). We considered flies and 
wasps of this study as generalist since these species do not tend to develop strong 
specialisations. Therefore, we regarded our observed pollinator community as generalist 
community. Pollinator visitation frequency was correlated with pollinator species 
richness (Spearman’s r = 0.89, p < 0.001). FDQ was positively correlated with plant 
species richness (Spearman’s r = 0.78, p < 0.001).  
Accepted Article

 
‘This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.’ 
In order to test Hypothesis I, blossom cover and FDQ were used as predictors for 
pollinator species richness and visitation frequency in Models 1.1 and 1.2. The models 
identified a strong positive correlation between blossom cover and pollinator species 
richness and visitation frequency. As expected, visitation frequency was negatively 
affected by FDQ, but no clear signal was found for species richness (Table 3, Figures 1 
and 2). Visitation frequency showed exponential increase over our measured range of 1-
50% blossom cover, whereas species richness indicated saturation within the range. The 
model for visitation frequency showed a large degree of uncertainty about the FDQ 
parameter. This high variation may have been due to high variation between samples 
and sampling seasons represented as random terms in Figure 2. Model 1.1 (species 
richness) identified 89% of the observed zeros as originating from the Poisson 
distribution and 11% as additional zeros, whereas model 1.2 (visitation frequency) 
identified all observed zeros as true zeros belonging to the Poisson distributed response 
with respect to the fitted model, the same pattern is present in Models 2.1 and 2.2 (Table 
3).  
Single trait diversity (FDtrait) and community mean (CWM) of individual traits 
In order to test for hypothesis II and III, we used two different models, one for species 
richness (2.1) and one for visitation frequency (2.2). As predictor variables, blossom 
cover, CWM and FDtrait for each flower trait entered both models (Equation 1). In 
general, we found the same patterns of trait effects for pollinator species richness and 
visitation frequency. Additionally, flower cover had a strong positive effect on both 
response variables (Figure 3 & Table 3). Zero-inflation showed the same pattern as 
discussed for Model 1.1 and 1.2, where only pollinator species richness data was zero 
inflated. 
In support of Hypothesis II, flower visitation frequency was influenced by the CWMs of 
four traits, but also responded to two trait FDtrait measures. CWM of flower height was 
Accepted Article

 
‘This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.’ 
positively correlated with visitation frequency and moderately correlated with CWM of 
flower area (Pearson’s r = 0.65, p < 0.001). CWM of nectar-sugar concentration was 
positively correlated with visitation frequency. Green reflectance was negatively 
correlated with visitation frequency and a priori correlated with white flowers since 
other flowers rarely reflected strongly in this range. CWM of amino acid amount was 
negatively correlated with visitation frequency. 
FDtrait of floral unit symmetry was negatively correlated with visitation frequency. Since 
floral unit symmetry- and nectar access FDtrait were strongly positively correlated 
(Pearson’s r = 0.84, p < 0.001) the effects of both traits were indistinguishable in this 
analysis and floral unit symmetry FDtrait results will be discussed as flower morphology 
FDtrait from now on. Colour FDtrait was correlated with UV FDtrait (Pearson’s r = 0.75, p 
< 0.001), in the model we used UV FDtrait only but will refer to it as reflectance FDtrait 
from now on. Reflectance FDtrait was positively correlated with visitation frequency. 
Figure 3 shows tested parameters and their effect distributions, Table 3 all influential 
parameters including their effect size, credible intervals and effect direction of posterior 
samples. 
As expected in hypothesis III, three of the CWM parameters strongly influenced 
visitation frequency (flower height, colour green and nectar-amino acid concentration) 
and were also correlated with pollinator species richness in Model 2.2. Surprisingly, no 
FDtrait measure was positively correlated with species richness (Figure 3 & Table 3). 
Discussion 
Using, to the best of our knowledge, the largest and most complete data set on 
pollinators and flower traits collected so far in a controlled biodiversity manipulation 
experiment, we tested overall trait diversity, single trait diversity and community-
weighted mean effects of 13 flower traits on pollinator visitation frequency and 
Accepted Article

 
‘This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.’ 
pollinator species richness. Our results, based on plot community observations, showed 
that pollinator visitation frequency declined with increasing overall trait diversity (FDQ) 
of plant communities and that pollinator species richness was not affected by FDQ, in a 
generalist dominated pollinator community. When comparing single trait diversities 
(FDtrait) and community mean values (CWM) of single traits, we found evidence for 
diversity and mass-ratio effects influencing pollinator-flower interactions. Moreover, 
flower reflectance, flower height/area, flower morphology, nectar-sugar concentration 
and nectar-amino acid concentration were the most important traits shaping this plant-
insect interaction. Additionally, the analyses underlined the pronounced positive effect 
of increasing blossom cover on pollinator diversity. 
Effects of overall trait diversity (FDQ) on pollinator visitation 
Cadotte et al. (2011) predicted a positive correlation between functional diversity and 
ecosystem functions. We showed that the opposite was true because FDQ reduced one 
proxy of pollination service, visitation frequency. This supported hypothesis I where we 
expected that increasing FDQ of all flower traits of a community is associated with a 
decrease in visitation frequency in pollinator communities dominated by generalist bees. 
An explanation is that a polylectic pollinator foraging on a trait-diverse flower 
community needs to alter its handling behaviour in respect to changing flower traits, 
increasing the time spent per flower (Cakmak et al. 2009). In consequence decreased 
exploitation efficiency leads to decreased attractiveness of diverse communities. Many 
polylectic bee species have developed flower constancy to counterbalance efficiency 
loss, allowing them to efficiently exploit flowers of the same species. This behavioural 
adaptation could also explain decreased flower visits in our trait diverse plant 
communities, since a flower constant pollinator only visits flowers of the trait 
combination it has chosen for its actual foraging bout. Theoretically, in pollinator 
communities with larger proportions of specialised species, the same mechanism should 
Accepted Article

 
‘This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.’ 
decrease visitation frequency given equal pollinator species abundances. The dilution of 
trait expressions would decrease visitation frequency of specialized and flower constant 
pollinators, especially if flower communities expressing the same trait values but with 
low diversity are nearby, as provided by the Jena Experiment set up. 
The lack of an effect of functional diversity on pollinator species richness can be 
attributed to the lack of specialized pollinators. Even though some abundantly observed 
species show specialisation on certain traits (Bombus lapidarius L.: short tongue - open 
flower, Bombus pascuorum Scopoli: long tongue - tubular flower), most have developed 
ways to still access trait mismatching flowers (e.g. short tonged bees destructively open 
tubular flowers at the basis; Stout et al. 2000). Furthermore, phylogenetically distant 
pollinator groups including Coleopterans and some Dipterans were not or rarely 
observed, hence our results account for highly generalist-dominated communities an
 
d the observed patterns could be reversed in communities hosting a larger 
proportion of specialised or phylogenetically distant pollinators as shown by a 
simulation of a similar grassland community by Junker et al. (2015).  
A previous study of the same data set by Ebeling et al. (2008) found pollinator species 
richness and visitation frequency to increase with flower species richness. Although 
flower species richness and FDQ are highly correlated,  our analysis showed a negative 
effect of FDQ on visitation frequency, in contrast to the positive effect of flower species 
richness found by Ebeling et al. (2008). We argue that this difference can be explained 
by the different temporal resolution of the analyses. Ebeling et al. (2008) pooled all six 
surveys of flower and pollinator communities at the plot level over a two year period, 
including observations of zero pollinators in plots with zero flower cover. In our study, 
we tested individually for each point in time whether a relationship between flower 
traits and pollinator visitations existed. In contrast to Ebeling et al. (2008), this required 
removing plots where no flowers occurred from the data. We summarize that the effects 
Accepted Article

 
‘This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.’ 
found by Ebeling et al. (2008) only become apparent when considering a larger time 
interval. These effects were not visible or even reversed at any given point in time, 
because they result from more continuous provision of flowers over time in more 
diverse plant communities (i.e. a lower probability of periods with zero flowers, Fig. 
A4). 
  
Effect of community-weighted means on pollinator richness and visitation frequency 
Mass-ratio effects include positive biodiversity effects resulting from dominance of 
certain species or trait expressions comprising the highest influence on the function of 
interest (Huston 1997; Aarssen 1997).  
As expected, visitation frequency was primarily influenced by mass-ratio effects, in 
particular positive by high values of flower height, dominance of green in flower 
reflectance and low amino acid concentration. Further, pollinator richness was affected 
by the same set of CMWs and in the same direction as visitation frequency. 
Additionally, high sugar CWM had a positive effect on pollinator species richness. Both 
results are in accordance with our hypothesis that (1) pollinator visitation frequency of a 
generalist pollinator community is mainly driven by mass-ratio effects. (2) High 
visitation frequencies are correlated with high species richness, potentially explaining 
the congruent effect of CWMs on pollinator species richness in our analysis. In the 
following we will discuss in detail the influential traits identified by our analysis. 
Flower height CWM 
Flower height/area was positively correlated with visitation frequency and pollinator 
species richness. In our study, high/large flowers were represented by a diversity of 
families including Asteraceae, Apiaceae and Ranunculaceae and attracted a diverse and 
frequently visiting pollinator community (see also Hegland and Totland 2005). This 
observation can be explained by a generally high conspicuousness of tall or large floral 
Accepted Article

 
‘This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.’ 
units for pollinators benefiting the whole plant community (Donnelly et al. 1998). 
Alternatively, the attractiveness of large floral units, for example composed flowers, 
could arise from high resource availability. 
Nectar sugar CWM 
Pollinator visitation frequency increased with nectar sugar concentration. Nectar 
samples were not taken in parallel to pollinator observations, but provided estimates for 
the flower species nectar production and nectar chemical composition. Given that our 
collection method for nectar was indicative for nectar standing crop (Zimmerman 1988), 
we showed that high availability of one of the most important reward traits in a plant 
community attracted many pollinators. The effect is certainly saturating at higher sugar 
concentrations due to maximal nectar viscosity and optimal foraging theory balancing 
water and sugar needs of pollinators.  
Nectar amino acid CWM 
Effects of nectar amino acid concentrations on bees are controversially discussed (e.g. 
Willmer 1980; Alm et al. 1990). We found negative effects of high amino acid 
concentrations on pollinator diversity and abundance. Generally, nectar-dependent 
pollinators such as butterflies respond more strongly to amino acid concentrations in 
nectar whereas most other pollinators primarily rely on pollen for amino acid supply 
(Alm et al. 1990). We conclude that a hymenoptera dominated pollinator community 
avoids high nectar amino acid concentrations. A possible mechanistic explanation of 
our finding was given by Carter et al. (2006) who reported that proline, the prevailing 
amino acid in our study, was a deterrent of Apis mellifera at high concentrations in 
nectar. Additionally, it needs to be mentioned, that nectar sampling was not aligned 
with pollinator observations and high variability of nectar-amino acid concentrations are 
shown for temperate plants (Willmer 1980); consequently uncontrolled factors could 
have led to methodological bias in this result. 
Accepted Article

 
‘This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.’ 
Colour CWM 
The flower reflectance spectrum in the human green range (471-540 nm) was negatively 
correlated with visitation frequency and species richness. In our study, reflectance in the 
green spectrum strongly correlated with reflectance in all colour spectra (except UV), 
which leads to human white flowers. As reported by other authors (e.g. Lamborn and 
Ollerton 2000, Zych 2006) Apiaceae, which comprised in our study most of human 
white flowers, seem rather unattractive for bees, the major visitor and most diverse 
group in this study.  
Effects of single trait diversity (FDtrait) on pollinator richness and visitation frequency 
Unlike the predictions of hypotheses II and III, FDtrait indices were correlated with 
visitation frequency rather than with pollinator species richness. Pollinator species 
richness should be affected by single trait diversity driven by niche partitioning and 
complementarity of pollinators (Junker et al. 2015). In Junker et al. (2015) the 
species/abundance ratio was 250/2549 in our study it was 67/6450 indicating a more 
diverse pollinator community of the first; the observed plot area was 3.5 times larger 
than in our analysis. Both, differences in scale and species richness could lead to the 
discrepancy between our results and their simulations, though species richness and 
degree of species specialisation should have the strongest effect. Consequently we think 
that niche differentiation is either not present in relatively species poor generalist 
pollinator communities, or not measurable due to the smaller plot size. The surprising 
result that pollinator visitation frequency responded to single trait diversity is supported 
by Hegland and Totland (2005) and Balzan et al. (2014), who assign the positive effect 
of functional diversity manly to the addition of highly attractive flower species at high 
functional diversity levels. This explanation can be mostly excluded in our experimental 
set up theoretically including all flower species at all trait diversity levels. We discuss 
Accepted Article

 
‘This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.’ 
the observed correlations between FDtrait and flower visitation frequency in detail in the 
following. 
Flower reflectance FDtrait 
Since Knuth (1891) found UV signals in flowers, it was shown that pollinators use these 
patterns for flower identification and localization of rewards (Petropoulou et al. 2001; 
Binkenstein et al. 2013). In contrast to diversity in other far distance recognition traits, 
for example flower height or area, a diverse reflectance pattern in flower communities 
more reliably indicates a variety of flower species. Given that pollen and nectar 
production varies with time and species (Pacini 2003), a diversity of flowers may 
indicate stable reward provision for generalist species with high probability of finding 
resources needed, at all times of the day.  
Flower morphology FDtrait 
Higher flower morphology FDtrait was associated with lower visitation frequency. We 
expected the FDtrait of flower morphology to be positively correlated with pollinator 
species richness, since flower tube depth, for example, is known as a trait selecting for 
short or long tonged pollinators (Fontaine et al. 2006, Stang et al. 2006). In the tested 
community the low proportion of specialized pollinators and the behavioural 
adaptations of morphologically different pollinators to access nectar or pollen of 
morphologically distant flowers can weaken positive morphology FDtrait – pollinator 
species richness effects. The expected preference of generalist pollinators exhibiting 
flower constancy for plant communities with low trait diversity could explain the 
negative effect of morphology FDtrait on visitation frequency. 
Conclusion 
The mechanisms of pollinator-flower interactions are complex. Multiple traits may 
affect flower visitation, ranging from long-distance attraction (colour, height, area), over 
nectar/pollen accessibility (symmetry, tube depth and size) or indicators of nectar/pollen 
Accepted Article

 
‘This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.’ 
presence (UV, scent) to chemical information of sugar and amino acid concentrations of 
nectar. Our analyses demonstrated the prevailing importance of long-distance attraction 
and direct reward measures. Hence we suggest that flower communities variable in 
colour and constant in morphology, providing large flowers or flowers higher than the 
average grassland vegetation and providing high sugar but low amino acid 
concentrations are more attractive. Moreover, generalist pollinator visitation frequency 
to flower communities decreased with overall flower functional diversity (this study), 
but increased with plant species richness when diverse flower phenologies increase the 
duration of flower provision (Ebeling et al. 2008). The consequences thereof for 
pollination quality of crop monocultures or diverse grasslands need to be evaluated by 
future studies. In general, diversity effects act on pollinator visitation frequency and 
mass-ratio effects of certain traits are important for this essential ecosystem function by 
affecting pollinator visitation frequency and species richness.  
Data Accessibility 
All data used in this manuscript will be deposited at http://iodp.pangaea.de/  
Acknowledgements 
The study was funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (FOR 1451). We thank 
the technical staff of the Jena Experiment for their work in maintaining the field site and 
support during measurements and the many student helpers for weeding the 
experimental plots. Further we thank Martina Stang, Marcos-Méndez and one 
anonymous reviewer for their valuable comments on the manuscript during the review 
process.  
 
 
Accepted Article

 
‘This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.’ 
References 
Aarssen, L. W. 1997. High Productivity in Grassland Ecosystems: Effected by Species 
Diversity or Productive Species? - Oikos 80: 183–184. 
Alm, J. et al. 1990. Preference of cabbage white butterflies and honey bees for nectar 
that contains amino acids. - Oecologia 84: 53–57. 
Austin, M. P. and Meyers, J. A. 1996. Current approaches to modelling the 
environmental niche of eucalypts: implication for management of forest 
biodiversity. - For. Ecol. Manag. 85: 95–106. 
Balzan, M. V. et al. 2014. Augmenting flower trait diversity in wildflower strips to 
optimise the conservation of arthropod functional groups for multiple 
agroecosystem services. - J. Insect Conserv. 18: 713–728. 
Bello, F. de et al. 2010. Towards an assessment of multiple ecosystem processes and 
services via functional traits. - Biodivers. Conserv. 19: 2873–2893. 
Binkenstein, J. et al. 2013. Increasing land-use intensity decreases floral colour diversity 
of plant communities in temperate grasslands. - Oecologia 173: 461–471. 
Blüthgen, N. and Klein, A.-M. 2011. Functional complementarity and specialisation: 
The role of biodiversity in plant–pollinator interactions. - Basic Appl. Ecol. 12: 
282–291. 
Botta-Dukát, Z. 2005. Rao’s quadratic entropy as a measure of functional diversity 
based on multiple traits. - J. Veg. Sci. 16: 533–540. 
Bunker, D. E. et al. 2005. Species Loss and Aboveground Carbon Storage in a Tropical 
Forest. - Science 310: 1029–1031. 
Accepted Article

 
‘This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.’ 
Brittain, C. et al. 2013. Synergistic effects of non-Apis bees and honey bees for 
pollination services. - Proc. R. Soc. B 280: 20122767. 
Cadotte, M. W. et al. 2011. Beyond species: functional diversity and the maintenance of 
ecological processes and services. - J. Appl. Ecol. 48: 1079–1087. 
Cakmak, I. et al. 2009. Different solutions by bees to a foraging problem. – Anim. 
Behav. 77: 1273–1280. 
Callaway, R. M. 1995. Positive interactions among plants. - Bot. Rev. 61: 306–349. 
Cardinale, B. J. et al. 2012. Biodiversity loss and its impact on humanity. - Nature 486: 
59–67. 
Carter, C. et al. 2006. A novel role for proline in plant floral nectars. - 
Naturwissenschaften 93: 72–79. 
Chittka, L. et al. 1999. Flower Constancy, Insect Psychology, and Plant Evolution. - 
Naturwissenschaften 86: 361–377. 
Clark, C.M. et al. 2012. Testing the Link between Functional Diversity and Ecosystem 
Functioning in a Minnesota Grassland Experiment. - PLoS ONE 7: e52821. 
Cohen, J. 1994. The earth is round (P-less-than.05). – Am. Psychol. 49: 997–1003. 
Dias, A. T. C. et al. 2013. An experimental framework to identify community functional 
components driving ecosystem processes and services delivery. - J. Ecol. 101: 
29–37. 
Díaz, S. et al. 2007. Incorporating plant functional diversity effects in ecosystem service 
assessments. - Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 104: 20684–20689. 
Accepted Article

 
‘This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.’ 
Donnelly, S.E.et al. 1998. Pollination in Verbascum thapsus (Scrophulariaceae): The 
Advantage of Being Tall. - Am. J. Bot. 85: 1618–1625. 
Dormann, C. F. et al. 2013. Collinearity: a review of methods to deal with it and a 
simulation study evaluating their performance. - Ecography 36: 27–46. 
Ebeling, A. et al. 2008. How does plant richness affect pollinator richness and temporal 
stability of flower visits? - Oikos 117: 1808–1815. 
Ebeling, A. et al. 2011. Plant–flower visitor interaction webs: Temporal stability and 
pollinator specialization increases along an experimental plant diversity 
gradient. - Basic Appl. Ecol. 12: 300–309. 
Fontaine, C. et al. 2006. Functional Diversity of Plant–Pollinator Interaction Webs 
Enhances the Persistence of Plant Communities. - PLoS Biol 4: e1. 
Fründ, J. et al. 2010. Pollinator diversity and specialization in relation to flower 
diversity. - Oikos 119: 1581–1590. 
Fründ, J. et al. 2013. Bee diversity effects on pollination depend on functional 
complementarity and niche shifts. - Ecology 94: 2042–2054. 
Garibaldi, L. A. et al. 2013. Wild Pollinators Enhance Fruit Set of Crops Regardless of 
Honey Bee Abundance. - Science 339: 1608–1611. 
Gelman, A. et al. 2003. Bayesian Data Analysis. - Chapman & Hall/CRC. 
Grime, J. P. 1998. Benefits of plant diversity to ecosystems: immediate, filter and 
founder effects. - J. Ecol. 86: 902–910. 
Haslett, J. R. 1989. Interpreting patterns of resource utilization: randomness and 
selectivity in pollen feeding by adult hoverflies. - Oecologia 78: 433-442. 
Accepted Article

 
‘This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.’ 
Hector, A. 1998. The Effect of Diversity on Productivity: Detecting the Role of Species 
Complementarity. - Oikos 82: 597–599. 
Hegland, S. J. and Totland, Ø. 2005. Relationships between species’ floral traits and 
pollinator visitation in a temperate grassland. - Oecologia 145: 586–594. 
Hooper, D. U. and Vitousek, P. M. 1997. The Effects of Plant Composition and 
Diversity on Ecosystem Processes. - Science 277: 1302–1305. 
Hooper, D. U. et al. 2005. Effects of Biodiversity on Ecosystem Functioning: A 
Consensus of Current Knowledge. - Ecol. Monogr. 75: 3–35. 
Hudewenz, A. et al. 2012. Herbivore and pollinator responses to grassland management 
intensity along experimental changes in plant species richness. - Biol. Conserv. 
150: 42–52. 
Huston, M. A. 1997. Hidden treatments in ecological experiments: re-evaluating the 
ecosystem function of biodiversity. - Oecologia 110: 449–460. 
Junker, R. R. et al. 2013. Specialization on traits as basis for the niche-breadth of flower 
visitors and as structuring mechanism of ecological networks. - Funct. Ecol. 27: 
329–341. 
Junker, R. R. et al. 2015. Functional and phylogenetic diversity of plant communities 
differently affect the structure of flower-visitor interactions and reveal 
convergences in floral traits. - Evol. Ecol. 29: 437–450. 
Kellner, K. 2015. jagsUI: A Wrapper Around rjags to Streamline JAGS Analyses. 
https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/jagsUI 
Accepted Article

 
‘This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.’ 
King, C. et al. 2013. Why flower visitation is a poor proxy for pollination: measuring 
single-visit pollen deposition, with implications for pollination networks and 
conservation. - Methods Ecol. Evol. 4: 811–818. 
Klotz, S. et al. 2002. BIOLFLOR - Eine Datenbank mit biologisch-ökologischen 
Merkmalen zur Flora von Deutschland. - BfN-Schriftenvertrieb im 
Landwirtschaftsverlag GmbH. 
Knuth, P. 1891. Die Einwirkung der Blütenfarben auf der photographischen Platte. - 
Biol. Centralbl. 48: 160–165. 
Laliberté, E. and Shipley, B. 2011. FD: measuring functional diversity from multiple 
traits, and other tools for functional ecology. 
Lamborn, E. and Ollerton, J. 2000. Experimental assessment of the functional 
morphology of inflorescences of Daucus carota (Apiaceae): testing the “fly 
catcher effect.” – Funct. Ecol. 14: 445–454. 
Laughlin, D. C. 2011. Nitrification is linked to dominant leaf traits rather than 
functional diversity. - J. Ecol. 99: 1091–1099. 
Lavorel, S. et al. 2011. Using plant functional traits to understand the landscape 
distribution of multiple ecosystem services. - J. Ecol. 99: 135–147. 
Mason, N. W. H. and de Bello, F. 2013. Functional diversity: a tool for answering 
challenging ecological questions. - J. Veg. Sci. 24: 777–780. 
McGill, B. J. et al. 2006. Rebuilding community ecology from functional traits. - Trends 
Ecol. Evol. 21: 178–185. 
Accepted Article

 
‘This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.’ 
Mokany, K. et al. 2008. Functional identity is more important than diversity in 
influencing ecosystem processes in a temperate native grassland. - J. Ecol. 96: 
884–893. 
Mouillot, D. et al. 2011. Functional Structure of Biological Communities Predicts 
Ecosystem Multifunctionality. - PLoS ONE 6: e17476. 
Naeem, S. et al. 2012. The Functions of Biological Diversity in an Age of Extinction. - 
Science 336: 1401–1406. 
Ollerton, J. et al. 2009. A global test of the pollination syndrome hypothesis. - Ann. Bot. 
103: 1471–1480. 
Pacini, E. et al. 2016. Nectar biodiversity: a short review. - Plant Syst. Evol. 238: 7–21. 
Park, T. and Casella, G. 2008. The Bayesian Lasso. - J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 103: 681–686. 
Petropoulou, Y. et al. 2001. Improved flower advertisement, pollinator rewards and 
seed yield by enhanced UV-B radiation in the Mediterranean annual Malcolmia 
maritima. - New Phytol. 152: 85–90. 
Plummer, M. JAGS: A program for analysis of Bayesian graphical models using Gibbs 
sampling. http://mcmc-jags.sourceforge.net 
Plummer, M. and Stukalov, A. 2014. rjags: Bayesian graphical models using MCMC. 
R Development Core Team. 2014. R: a language and environment for statistical 
computing. R foundation for Statistical Computing. Vienna, Austria. www.R-
project.org 
Accepted Article

 
‘This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.’ 
Roscher, C. et al. 2004. The role of biodiversity for element cycling and trophic 
interactions: an experimental approach in a grassland community. - Basic Appl. 
Ecol. 5: 107–121. 
Jäger, E. et al. 2013. Rothmaler-Exkursionsflora von Deutschland, Gefässpflanzen: 
Atlasband. - Springer-Verlag. 
Schuldt, A. et al. 2014. Functional and phylogenetic diversity of woody plants drive 
herbivory in a highly diverse forest. - New Phytol. 202: 864–873. 
Schumacher, J. and Roscher, C. 2009. Differential effects of functional traits on 
aboveground biomass in semi-natural grasslands. - Oikos 118: 1659–1668. 
Stout, J. C. et al. 2000. Nectar robbing, forager efficiency and seed set: Bumblebees 
foraging on the self incompatible plant Linaria vulgaris (Scrophulariaceae). - 
Acta Oecol. 21: 277–283. 
Stang, M. et al. 2006. Asymmetric specialization and extinction risk in plant–flower 
visitor webs: a matter of morphology or abundance? - Oecologia 151: 442–453. 
Tilman, D. et al. 1997. The Influence of Functional Diversity and Composition on 
Ecosystem Processes. - Science 277: 1300–1302. 
Westrich, P. 1990. Die Wildbienen Baden-Württembergs. – Eugen Ulmer Verlag. 
Willmer, P. G. 1980. The effects of insect visitors on nectar constituents in temperate 
plants. - Oecologia 47: 270–277. 
Yoshioka, Y. et al. 2007. Ability of Bumblebees to Discriminate Differences in the 
Shape of Artificial Flowers of Primula sieboldii (Primulaceae). - Ann. Bot. 99: 
1175–1182. 
Accepted Article

 
‘This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.’ 
Zimmerman, M. 1988. Pollination Biology of Montane Plants: Relationship Between 
Rate of Nectar Production and Standing Crop. - Am. Midl. Nat. 120: 50–57. 
Zych, M. 2006. On flower visitors and true pollinators: The case of protandrous 
Heracleum sphondylium. - Plant Syst. Evol. 263: 159–179. 
Supplementary material (available online as Appendix oik.XXXXX at 
<www.oikosjournal.org/readers/appendix>).  Appendix 1. 
 
Accepted Article

 
‘This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.’ 
Figure Legends 
Figure 1: Schematic overview of hypothesis tested; underlying bars increase with 
increasing parameter value. A) Expected effects of overall functional diversity including 
all traits (FDQ) on pollinator species richness and visitation frequency. B) Expected 
effect of individual trait diversity (FDtrait) and community weighted mean (CWM) on 
pollinator species richness and visitation frequency. Traits shown are exemplary; a full 
list of all 13 traits is given in Table 1. CWM of categorical traits was evaluated as 
binomial variable. 
 
 
 
Accepted Article

 
‘This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.’ 
Figure 2: 
Estimated models for pollinator visitation frequency (model 1.2) and species richness 
(model 1.1) in response to the strong effect of blossom cover (A, C) and negative effect 
of FDQ on visitation frequency (B) which is absent for species richness (D). Solid lines 
represent mean estimated effect of blossom cover and FDQ. Shaded areas represent ± 
95% credible intervals, keeping the other parameter at 1 and 0 for FDQ and blossom 
cover, respectively. Dotted lines represent mean model estimates for the random effect 
sampling season, which shows for panel A that variation is largely independent of 
sampling season, whereas substantial variation between sampling seasons exists for 
panels B, C and D. 
 
 
 
Accepted Article

 
‘This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.’ 
Figure 3:  
Estimated effect sizes for all single functional flower traits for visitation frequency and 
species richness. For each variable, medians (points), 50% credible intervals (thick line) 
and 95% credible intervals (thin line) of the posterior are shown. Note, that variables 
were standardized, meaning that effect sizes are directly comparable. (**) denotes more 
than 95% posterior probability on either positive or negative values, (-) denotes the 
absence of such a signal. To allow model convergence one of each pair of auto-
correlated predictors was excluded. Therefore is the effect of flower height CWM 
represented by flower area CWM, of flower access CWM by bilateral symmetry CWM, 
of stamen number CWM by stamen location CWM and of colour yellow and white 
CWM by colour green CWM. Auto-correlations between colour FDtrait and UV FDtrait 
are jointly represented and discussed as reflectance FDtrait and of flower access and 
symmetry FDtrait as morphology FDtrait. 
 
 
Accepted Article

 
 
‘This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.’ 
Table Legends 
Table 1:  
Flower traits used to calculate overall functional diversity (FDQ), single trait diversities (FDtrait) and CWMs. Blossom cover represents the 
weighting value for flower functional diversity calculations. 
Nr. 
Trait 
Unit/Coding 
Levels/Range/Raw unit 
Data structure  
Ecological importance 
1 
Blossom colour 
1/0 
400-470nm (blue) 
integer 
Flower recognition 
 
 
1/0 
471-540nm (green) 
integer 
Flower recognition 
 
 
1/0 
541-610nm (yellow) 
integer 
Flower recognition 
 
 
1/0 
611-680nm (red) 
integer 
Flower recognition 
2 
Blossom UV reflectance 
1-6 
0-7, 8-15, 16-27, 28-39, 40-
66, 67-85% 
continuous 
Flower recognition, sugar availability 
3 
Flower height 
cm 
4.5-58.5 
continuous 
Flower recognition, attractiveness, foraging 
range of visitor (low vs high) 
4 
Inflorescence area 
mm² 
4.2-86.19 
continuous 
Flower recognition, availability of space for 
simultaneous visitation  
ccepted Articl

 
 
‘This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.’ 
5 
Flower symmetry 
1/0 
radial/bilateral 
integer 
Adaptation to certain visitor community 
6 
Nectar amount 
1-4 
no, little, medium, high 
categorical 
Visitor reward 
7 
Sugar content in nectar 
µmol/ml 
31.4-888.2 
continuous 
Visitor reward 
8 
Amino acid content in 
nectar 
µmol/ml 
5.8-165.3 
continuous 
Visitor reward 
9 
Pollen 
1/0 
little/high 
integer 
Visitor reward 
10 
Flowering length 
day 
2-51.2 
continuous 
Duration of resource availability 
11 
Stamen location 
1/0 
inside/outside 
integer 
Accessibility of resource 
12 
Stamen number 
2-15 
2-15 
continuous 
Visitor reward, accessibility of resource 
13 
Nectar accessibility 
1/0 
open /hidden 
integer 
Filter for visitor morphological traits  
 
Blossom cover 
% 
1-50 
continuous 
Amount of available flowers per plot 
ccepted Articl

 
 
‘This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.’ 
Table 2:  
Details of the data sets and chosen statistical models for species richness and visitation 
frequency of all pollinators for all three years pooled. 
 Response variable 
No. values = 0  No. values > 0 Range Distribution Lambda 
Species richness 
230 
303 
0-6 
Poisson 
0.7 
Visitation frequency 230 
303 
0-419 ZI-Poisson 
unknown 
Accepted Article

 
 
‘This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.’ 
Table 3: 
Parameter estimates with a clear posterior signal (>95 % of posterior with same sign as mean regression coefficient (Mean) of 
the ZIP-GLMMs and extend of zero-inflation. Results are presented for Model 1.1 and 1.2 testing combined trait diversity effects 
and for Model 2.1 and 2.2 testing FDtrait and CWM effects on visitation frequency and species richness. Values represent means, 
lower and upper margins of 95% credible intervals, and exact proportion of posterior with the same sign as the mean (f). 
 
  
Visitation frequency  
Species richness 
  
  
Mean 
lower CI upper CI 
f 
Mean 
lower CI 
upper CI 
f 
Model 1.1 and 
1.2 
Intercept 
-1.379 
-2.542 
-0.503 
1 
-1.227 
-1.660 
-0.818 
1 
Blossom cover 
1.207 
0.871 
1.602 
1 
0.532 
0.405 
0.660 
1 
FDQ 
-0.217 
-0.424 
0.011 
0.966  
 
 
 
Zero-inflation 
0.801 
0.726 
0.878 
1 
  
  
  
  
Model 2.1 and 
2.2 
Intercept 
-1.545 
-2.659 
-0.534 
0.993 -1.317 
-1.753 
-0.913 
1 
Blossom cover 
1.299 
1.023 
1.637 
1 
0.594 
0.449 
0.738 
1 
Flower height 
CWM 
0.421 
0.068 
0.791 
0.990 
0.330 
0.144 
0.524 
1 
ccepted Articl

 
 
‘This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.’ 
UV diversity 
0.181 
-0.002 
0.378 
0.973  
 
 
 
 
Nectar-sugar 
CWM 
-0.304 
0.003 
0.614 
0.976  
 
 
 
 
Symmetry 
diversity 
-0.351 
-0.608 
-0.095 
0.996  
 
 
 
 
Amino acid 
CWM 
-0.787 
-1.096 
-0.471 
1 
-0.234 
-0.407 
-0.066 
0.997 
 
Green CWM 
-0.551 
-0.890 
-0.237 
0.998 -0.185 
-0.376 
0.004 
0.972 
  
Zero-inflation 
0.886 
0.808 
0.959 
1 
  
  
  
  
 
ccepted Articl
