Annals of Botany 129: 29–36, 2022
https://doi.org/10.1093/aob/mcab121, available online at www.academic.oup.com/aob
A measure of generalized soil fertility that is largely independent of species 
identity
Xavier Lamontagne and Bill Shipley*,
Département de biologie, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke (Qc), J1K 2R9, Canada
* For correspondance. E-mail Bill.Shipley@Usherbrooke.ca
Received: 8 July 2021  Returned for revision: 24 August 2021  Editorial decision: 13 September 2021  Accepted: 17 September 2021 
Electronically published: 20 September 2021
•  Background and Aims  In 2019, Daou and Shipley produced an operational definition of ‘generalized’ soil fertility 
(FG) for plant community ecology and quantified FG using a structural equation model (SEM) invoking a single latent 
variable. We evaluate a critical assumption of this model: that FG is generalizable to any combination of plant species; i.e. 
that any combination of plant species will respond in the same direction to the soil ‘fertility’ gradient in terms of growth.
•  Methods  We grew nine widely different species singly in each of 25 soils from southern Quebec, Canada, 
whose FG value had been previously quantified. The original SEM was tested using every possible combination 
involving from four to nine species.
•  Key Results  The assumption was rejected due to a subset of three species that responded to a second latent 
dimension. We then proposed an alternative model that includes FG plus a second latent variable that measures 
species’ deviations from FG due to specific adaptations to soil pH. This alternative model was consistent with every 
combination of up to eight species. The predictions of FG when ignoring this second dimension and when using the 
new model were extremely correlated (r =0.98).
•  Conclusions  The initial unidimensional model of Daou and Shipley was successful in non-acid soils but not in 
soils with extreme pH and when species specifically adapted to such extreme soils were included. The alternative 
two-dimensional model takes into account these exceptions and is consistent with the notion of shared physio-
logical niche responses along a gradient of generalized soil fertility.
Key words: Structural equation modelling, SEM, latent variable measurement model, plant communities, soil fer-
tility gradient, relative growth rate, shared physiological preference, inclusive fundamental niche.
INTRODUCTION
Trait-based plant ecology has captured the attention of re-
searchers because it promises generalizable predictions across 
ecological and spatial scales that are independent of taxonomic 
identity (Shipley et  al., 2016; Laliberté, 2017) although this 
promise has not yet been completely realized (Shipley et al., 
2016). Functional ecologists have developed standardized 
protocols to measure traits (Pérez-Harguindeguy et al., 2013). 
This standardization of trait measurements is an essential ele-
ment in the ability of trait-based ecology to generalize across 
species and environments and to create worldwide databases 
(Fraser, 2020) that allow researchers to compare trait measure-
ments and reveal global patterns in trait variation.
However, the standardization of trait measurements is only 
half of the challenge since trait-based ecology also attempts to 
link variation in traits to variation in environmental variables. 
The current inability to define and measure environmental gra-
dients using standardized methods has been a huge barrier 
for model development in plant community ecology (Austin, 
1980; Austin and Smith, 1990; Garnier et al., 2016). This is 
because an environmental gradient in community ecology is 
not synonymous with an environmental variable. To be useful 
and generalizable, the environmental variables that define an 
environmental gradient must be measured in a way that accords 
with how plants, not physical or chemical measuring devices, 
respond to them and in a way that is comparable and generaliz-
able across studies, geographical locations and species assem-
blages (Shipley et al., 2016).
For example, the most influential non-neutral theories of 
plant community structure (Grime, 1977; Tilman, 1988) invoke 
the notion of a gradient of site ‘fertility’ (i.e. the ability of a local 
environment to produce plant growth) along which the assumed 
mechanisms of community assembly change systematically. 
Both Grime and Tilman agree that soil properties affecting the 
ability of a local environment to produce plant growth (here-
after, soil fertility) are key components of site fertility. Soil fer-
tility is here defined as the amount of plant growth per unit time 
that a soil can support when holding constant all other compo-
nents of site fertility. However, it is extremely difficult to define 
and measure soil fertility at the level of plant communities. Soil 
‘fertility’ in ecology has been typically quantified by measuring 
its causes: concentrations or fluxes of various macro- or micro-
nutrients, organic matter, pH, water-holding capacity and com-
binations of all these variables; see Daou and Shipley (2019) 
for a large but incomplete list. These cause-based soil ‘fertility’ 
metrics are not generalizable for two main reasons. First, dif-
ferent soils can sustain the same level of plant growth due to 
different combinations of causes. Second, the link between soil 
© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Annals of Botany Company. 
All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

Lamontagne & Shipley — Generalized soil fertility
30
properties and plant growth is species-dependent and different 
species in the same soil are often co-limited by different nutri-
ents or nutrient ratios (Harpole et al., 2011).
Daou and Shipley (2019) proposed a new method for 
quantifying soil fertility at the scale of plant communities. 
Their method focused on the effect of soils on plant growth of 
target species in controlled conditions rather than on soil prop-
erties that might cause differences in plant growth. They did 
this by combining the phytometer approach (Clements and 
Goldsmith, 1924) with a latent variable measurement model 
(Grace, 2006; Bollen, 2014; Shipley, 2016) in the context of 
structural equation modelling (SEM). They hypothesized that 
all plant species will experience the same ‘growth potential’ in 
the same soil, but each species will manifest this potential to a 
different degree. Thus, while each species will have a different 
growth rate in the same soil, all species will either increase or 
decrease growth together if this soil growth potential changes. 
They called this latent growth potential of a soil that is common 
to all species the ‘generalized’ fertility (FG) of the soil. This 
hypothesis, translated into a causal diagram, is shown in Fig. 1  
and, translated into an SEM, requires that all covariation be-
tween the growth responses of different species (relative growth 
rate, RGR) across different soils be caused by a single latent 
(unmeasured) causal property, i.e. FG. If this assumption of a 
single latent cause is not true then the SEM will provide a poor 
fit to the empirical data and the SEM will be rejected. They 
tested and calibrated their model using four different species 
having large ecological differences but whose seeds are avail-
able worldwide (Triticum aestivum, Festuca rubra, Arabidopsis 
thaliana, Trifolium pratense) and that were grown in 76 soils 
in southern Quebec (Canada). The main result of their study 
is a method that quantifies soil fertility independently of the 
underlying causes and this makes the model geographically 
generalizable. See Daou and Shipley (2019) for a more detailed 
explanation of the latent measurement model.
However, the Daou and Shipley (2019) model makes an im-
portant untested assumption: it assumes that any plant species, 
not just the four chosen phytometer species, will respond in 
the same direction to the soil ‘fertility’ gradient in terms of 
growth. If this is not true then the level of fertility of a soil will 
differ depending on the choice of phytometers, thus limiting the 
‘generality’ of this fertility concept and its application to plant 
community ecology. The goal of the present paper is to pro-
vide a critical test of this untested assumption by asking three 
questions.
Question 1. Is the original model supported independently of 
the choice and of the number of phytometer species included 
in it? If yes, an SEM latent measurement model with only one 
latent variable will not be rejected independently of the species 
included within it. If the model is rejected then this leads to the 
following two questions.
Question 2.  How many dimensions exist within our data 
and in which conditions of soils/species are those dimensions 
manifested?
Question 3. If there is more then one dimension, what is the 
quantitative effect on the predicted level of soil fertility if the 
original unidimensional Daou and Shipley (2019) model is 
used while ignoring the other dimensions?
METHODS
To evaluate our questions, we need to select plant species that 
maximize diverse responses across the hypothesized ‘fertility’ 
gradient while still being able to grow them in the same non-soil 
abiotic conditions (light intensity, temperature, humidity, water 
inputs). For practical reasons we selected nine herbaceous spe-
cies of open grassland habitats and chose species that differed 
as much as possible in their field distributions with respect to 
soil resources (Appendix: Supplementary Data Table S1). These 
species were selected based on three criteria: (1) Ellenberg’s 
(1974) nitrogen (or nutrient) index, consisting of a subjective 
rank from 1 (Festuca ovina L.; ‘plant typical of extremely in-
fertile sites’) to 9 (Urtica dioica L.; ‘plant typical of extremely 
rich sites such as cattle resting places or near polluted rivers’); 
Grime’s (1977) Competitor-Stress tolerator-Ruderal (CSR) 
strategies calculated using STRATEFY (Pierce et al., 2017); 
and (3) specific adaptations to soil resource capture such as the 
intensity of mycorrhizal associations and Rhizobium symbiosis. 
Two of the species [Urtica dioica and Capsella bursa-pastoris 
(L.) Medik] lack mycorrhizal associations and one species 
(Melilotus albus Medik) is symbiotic with Rhizobium. The 
seeds of Centaurea nigra, Melilotus albus and Chenopodium 
album were collected from populations around the campus of 
the University of Sherbrooke and seeds of the other species 
came from commercial suppliers. More details on the ecology 
of the phytometers is available in Appendix1: Table S1.
We used 23 of the 76 sites of Daou and Shipley (2019), which 
consisted of 76 soils from uncultivated ‘grasslands’ covering a 
range of ~4900 km2 in southern Quebec (Canada). Those sites 
were chosen from pedological maps (Cann and Gérin-Lajoie, 
1942; Lamontagne et  al., 2002) to be representative of the 
1
FG
RGR1j
RGR2j
RGR3j
RGR4j
RGR5j
RGR6j
RGR7j
RGR8j
RGR9j
e9j
e8j
e7j
e6j
e5j
e4j
e3j
e2j
e1j
Fig. 1.  Theoretical model illustrating the hypothesis of Daou and Shipley 
(2019). A latent variable named generalized fertility (FG) causes variation in 
growth for multiple species (RGR1 through RGR9) in multiple soils ‘j’. The e’s 
represent the mutually independent residual errors. The variance of FG is fixed 
to 1 so that it is a standardized variable. Combinations of this model consist 
of using subsets of multiple RGRs (4 minimally due to degrees of freedom 
constraints).

Lamontagne & Shipley — Generalized soil fertility
31
diversity of soils within the region (Appendix 1: Supplementary 
Data Table S2). Our 23 sites, currently non-agricultural grass-
lands, wastelands and sand quarries due to anthropogenic ac-
tivity, were chosen to cover the range of FG values previously 
calculated by Daou and Shipley (2019) from the least to the 
most fertile. We added two soils to extend the two extremes 
of the gradient. A commercial horticultural soil (Black Earth, 
Fafard’s, Agro Mix) produced to a maximally fertile soil (0.5 % 
total nitrogen, 0.07 % available P2O5, 0.1 % soluble K2O) and 
non-acidogenic mine tailings (essentially crushed bedrock) 
from northeastern Quebec produced a maximally infertile site 
making a total of 25 different soils for the study (see Table S2 
for more details). We collected soil in the top layer (0–15 cm) 
from each site. The soils were dried at room temperature, 
passed through a 2-mm sieve and then stored at 4 °C in pots 
(8 × 8 × 9 cm) prior to the phytometer experiment (below). 
One kilogram of each soil, stored in the same way, was kept to 
measure soil physical and chemical properties.
Each combination of species and soils was replicated four 
times giving 900 pots (9 species × 25 soils × 4 replicate pots). 
Because of limited space, we separated the experiment in 
three blocks each containing every combination of species 
and soils. The three blocks contained 306, 306 and 288 pots, 
respectively. Eighteen pots were randomly placed in each of 
17 plastic boxes (60.5 × 40.95 × 34.5 cm) with lids and these 
boxes were randomly placed in a growth room. Each plastic 
box had two 5.5-cm-diameter holes to allow airflow and a per-
forated plastic platform suspended 5 cm from the bottom onto 
which the pots were placed. A small amount of free-standing 
water was maintained below the perforated platform to con-
trol humidity of the air. Within each box, temperature and rela-
tive humidity were monitored at 30-min intervals using logtag 
probes (logtagrecorders.com). Using these temperature and 
relative humidity values, we also calculated the vapour pres-
sure deficit of the air following Jones (1992). Temperature was 
28.7 ± 2.9 °C (mean ± s.d.), relative humidity was 90.2 ± 8.1 % 
and vapour pressure deficit was 0.41 ± 0.35 kPa. Two 1000-W 
high-pressure sodium lamps provided a mean daily quantum 
yield of 9.8 mol m2 d−1 over a 16 : 8 h (day : night) cycle. The 
pots were watered with deionized water 1 week before planting 
the seeds to let the soils stabilize. Enough seeds were planted to 
produce four to six individuals per pot. During growth, excess 
seedlings were thinned to maximize the distance between indi-
viduals while still keeping four to six individuals per pot. All 
the pots were watered to field capacity with deionized water 
three times per week with sequential watering separated by an 
interval of 36–39  h of light. This spacing between watering 
intervals was chosen to allow the natural variation of soil 
water-holding capacity to be expressed while avoiding strong 
water limitation. Individuals of each species were harvested at 
one of two harvest dates; these two dates varied between spe-
cies and were chosen to (1) allow sufficient growth between 
the two harvests dates, (2) allow sufficient time for seedlings 
to become independent of seed reserves while (3) minimizing 
the total growth period of each species. These harvest dates 
(days after germination) are (13, 26) for Chenopodium album, 
(14, 28) for Capsella bursa-pastoris, (15, 28) for Centaurea 
nigra, (25, 50) for Festuca ovina, (17, 28) for Melilotus albus, 
(22, 39) for Pilosella aurantiaca, (24, 45) for Sedum acre, (6, 
20) for Triticum aestivum and (25, 40) for Urtica dioica. At 
each harvest date, the above-ground biomass of two or three 
individuals (two individuals for the naturally larger plants of 
T. aestivum, M. albus and C. nigra) were randomly harvested, 
dried at 60 °C for at least 2 weeks and weighed. We calculated 
RGR (mg  g−1  d−1), as explained below, of each species–soil 
combination from these dried biomasses. Due to a COVID-
19 interruption, the second harvests of F. ovina, P. aurantiaca, 
S. acre and U. dioica were not done in the first block.
We measured four soil variables from the 2-mm sieved soils 
used in the phytometer experiment. Particle size distribution 
(sand, silt and clay) was determined using the hydrometer 
method (Kroetsch and Wang, 2007). We used 40 g of mineral 
soil (burned at 400 °C for 16 h) with 50 mL of a dispersal so-
lution (93 g of sodium hexametaphosphate and 7 g of sodium 
bicarbonate per litre of water). Organic matter content was 
measured based loss on ignition. The soils were first dried at 
105 °C for 24 h and then we burned 2 g of soil at 400 °C for 
16 h following Ben-Dor and Banin (1989). Soil water-holding 
capacity was determined using the gravimetric method (g 
H2O/g dried soil) 24 h after saturation while preventing evap-
orative loss. Lastly, soil pH was measured in deionized water 
using a 1 : 2 (soil : water) ratio for mineral soils and 1 : 10 
ratio for organic soils (Hendershot et al. 2007). Solutions were 
stirred for 30 min and pH measurements were taken 30 min 
after stabilization.
We estimated RGR in each soil by constructing a mixed-effects 
model using the lme4 package in R (Bates et al., 2015). We did 
this separately for each species to ensure statistical independence. 
The models were specified as ln(biomass) ~ age (fixed effect, 
days) + soil (random effect). We also included the nested effect 
of the boxes, the pots and the blocks for each species if the model 
was convergent and not singular. These random effects were gen-
erally absent or very small compared to the effect of the soils. The 
slope associated with age was random across soils but the intercept 
(i.e. seedling mass at germination) was fixed since this parameter 
cannot vary between soils. RGR in each soil was quantified as 
the random slope estimate associated with each soil via the coef() 
function associated with the lmer() function. These random slope 
estimates are best linear unbiased predictors (BLUP).
Our first objective was to test the hypothesis that the patterns 
of covariation between the RGR values of the different species 
across the different soils are all caused by a single latent vari-
able (‘generalized’ fertility, FG, Fig. 1). We tested this by trans-
lating this graphical causal model into a maximum-likelihood 
SEM (Shipley, 2016) in which the RGR values of each species 
are caused by a single latent variable representing ‘generalized 
soil fertility’. This model was tested using the sem() function 
of the lavaan package of R (Rosseel 2012). A null probability 
of less than 0.05 results in the rejection of our hypothesis. 
Four indicators (i.e. RGR values of four species) are the min-
imum number required in the SEM to have positive degrees of 
freedom. We therefore tested this hypothesis 382 times using 
all possible combinations of from four to nine species. All pos-
sible species combinations were generated with the combin-
ations() function of gtools (Warnes et al., 2015). Next, because 
the Daou and Shipley (2019) hypothesis was rejected in certain 
circumstances, we proceeded to the other objectives mentioned 
in the Introduction.

Lamontagne & Shipley — Generalized soil fertility
32
The second objective consisted of two parts: (1) to deter-
mine the number of dimensions that existed in the RGR values 
of the phytometers in the different soils and (2) to determine 
the properties of the soils/species associated with these dimen-
sions. To do this, we performed a principal component analysis 
(PCA) to explore the dimensionality of the RGR values of the 
nine species across the 25 different soils. We then searched for 
correlations between the axis scores of the PCA and the four 
measured soil properties. Next, we identified the combinations 
of species in the 382 different models that occurred in those 
models that were rejected (P < 0.05). Based on these results, we 
then proposed a second SEM. This model includes two latent 
variables influencing variation in RGR (Fig. 2). The general-
ized fertility not including the effects of pH (F -pH
G
) was the first 
latent variable whose variance was fixed to unity. We explicitly 
linked a second latent variable to soil pH by fixing the path 
coefficient from it to measured soil pH at unity. The covari-
ance between the two latent variables was fixed to zero to en-
sure independence. The first latent was therefore a standardized 
variable having standard deviation units while the second la-
tent was measured in pH units. We tested this alternative model 
using lavaan for all possible combinations of species. Because 
this new model has two latent variables, we could only test the 
combinations from five to nine species (252 models) due to de-
grees of freedom constraints.
Our third objective was to determine the amount of error intro-
duced if the original model of Daou and Shipley is used even 
when it is statistically rejected; i.e. when ignoring any additional 
latent dimensions. To do so, we calculated the predicted value 
of the first latent variable, FG in Fig. 1 and F -pH
G
in Fig. 2, using 
the predict() function for each soil and for each species combin-
ation from five to nine species. Because we used many different 
models containing different indicator species and we required the 
latent variable to be measured on a comparable scale (standard 
deviation units), the latent variable was expressed in a common 
unit of standard deviations by fixing its variance to unity. We then 
measured the correlation between the two sets of predictions of 
this latent and the mean squared residual between the two sets.
All R code and the data files are available in Supplementary 
Data S1.zip.
RESULTS
The variation in temperature, relative humidity and vapour 
pressure deficit of the air in the growth boxes were constant 
between blocks (Appendix 2: Supplementary Data Figs S1– 
S3). Although there were obvious differences in the average 
RGR value between species, there was just as much variation 
in RGR within each species across the different soils under the 
controlled conditions (Appendix 2: Fig. S4). The null prob-
ability associated with the hypothesized unidimensional SEM 
(Fig. 1) varied greatly depending on the species composition 
and the number of species (Appendix 2: Fig. S5). Most models 
involving only four species were not rejected but virtually all 
models involving six or more species were rejected. The pat-
terns of covariations between the RGR values were not con-
sistent with a unidimensional model involving a single latent 
variable as hypothesized by Daou and Shipley (2019). However, 
two of the models composed of seven species were accepted: 
the first model excludes F. ovina and U. dioica (χ 2 = 18.84, 14 
RGR1j
RGR2j
RGR3j
RGR4j
RGR5j
RGR6j
RGR7j
RGR8j
RGR9j
e9j
e10j
e8j
e7j
e6j
e5j
e4j
e3j
e2j
e1j
1
1
0
FG
–pH
pH
FpH
Fig. 2.  Alternative theoretical model with two latent variables. FG
-pH represents a first latent attribute, independent of soil pH, to which all species respond (RGR1j 
to RGR9j). FpH represents a second latent attribute independent of FG
-pH, which is the ‘true’ soil pH, which is measured with error from the laboratory pH, to which 
all species respond. The e’s represent the errors e1j to e10j. Here the variance of FG
-pH is fixed to 1 and the variance of FpH is free while its slope to laboratory-
measured soil pH is fixed to unity. Combinations of this alternative model consist of using a subset of multiple RGRs (five minimally due to degrees of freedom 
constraints).

Lamontagne & Shipley — Generalized soil fertility
33
d.f., P = 0.171) and the second model excludes P. aurantiaca 
and U. dioica (χ 2 = 19.124, 14 d.f., P = 0.160).
The first dimension of the PCA accounted for 79.9 % of the 
variance in the RGR values of the phytometers across the different 
soils (Appendix 2: Supplementary Data Fig. S6). The second di-
mension accounted for an additional 7.8 % of the variance and the 
scores of the second dimension were highly correlated with the 
pH of the soils (r = −0.758, P = 1.14e-05). This second dimen-
sion was expressed primarily through the differential responses 
of three species. Festuca ovina and P. aurantiaca had higher RGR 
values than predicted using the model of Daou and Shipley (2019) 
in acidic soils and S. acre had higher RGR values than predicted in 
alkaline soils. The alternative model (Fig. 2) that includes a latent 
pH dimension fitted the data well (Appendix 2: Fig. S7) even with 
eight species (χ 2 = 20.321, 19 d.f., P = 0.376, excluding U. dioica) 
although the alternative model was still rejected if U. dioica was 
included (χ 2 = 50.193, 26 d.f., P = 0.003).
By how much would the predicted values of generalized 
fertility be wrong if one used the original model of Daou and 
Shipley (2019); that is, if one ignored the second latent variable 
associated with soil pH? The relationship between the predicted 
values of FG in Fig. 1 (i.e. when ignoring pH) and the predicted 
values of the first latent variable (F -pH
G
) in Fig. 2 (i.e. when 
controlling for pH) is shown in Fig. 3. The predicted values are 
extremely tightly correlated (r = 0.98, t = 402.53, P = 2.2e-16) 
and the residual sum of squares is low (3.11e-15).
DISCUSSION
A fundamental claim underlying the SEM measurement 
model by Daou and Shipley (2019) was that, in the absence 
of interspecific competition, a soil that produces higher growth 
for one species would also produce higher growth for all other 
species when non-soil causes of growth are held constant. In 
other words, species must share a common linear response of 
their RGRs throughout the ‘fertility’ gradient. Such responses 
can differ quantitatively, but they need to be in the same dir-
ection. This is why Daou and Shipley (2019) called the single 
latent variable in their SEM measurement model ‘generalized’ 
fertility (FG). FG has a direct link to older theoretical niche 
concepts.
Hutchinson distinguished between ‘realized’ and ‘funda-
mental’ niches (Hutchinson 1957). The fundamental (or physio-
logical) niche is the environmental space that a species would 
occupy in the absence of interspecific competition. The realized 
niche is the environmental space that a species would occupy in 
the presence of interspecific competition. It is empirically well 
established that the realized niche differs greatly between spe-
cies and different species reach their fitness optima at a distinct 
point in this space. However, it is much less well known how 
fundamental niches are distributed in environmental space. The 
most common idea is that fundamental niches also have dis-
tinct fitness optima: i.e. each species has a different optimum 
in fundamental niche space and so there is no one point in fun-
damental niche space that is best for all species. This view dir-
ectly contradicts the notion of a generalized soil fertility. A less 
common idea is the notion of fundamental niche inclusion, or 
‘shared’ physiological responses (Colwell and Fuentes, 1975). 
Here, all species have highest fitness at the same point in the 
fundamental niche (a shared response) but there is a trade-off 
between the breadth of the fundamental niche (i.e. the range of 
suboptimal environmental conditions that still allow the species 
Black earth
Mine tailings
–1
0
1
2
Soils
10
12
20
30
32
33
35
36
37
41
42
51
55
61
63
68
69
71
74
75
76
80
81
82
83
FG
–2
–1
0
1
2
FG
–pH
Fig. 3.  Relationship between the predicted values of FG (one-dimensional SEM) and F -pH
G
 (first latent in a two-dimensional SEM) for 256 structural equation 
measurement models. Each colour represents a soil from which 256 predictions have been made. The two extreme soils are represented by solid circles (black 
earth = 82 and non-acidogenic mine tailings = 81).

Lamontagne & Shipley — Generalized soil fertility
34
to have positive fitness) and competitive ability to exclude 
other species from the preferred region of the fundamental 
niche. Species with the highest fitness at the preferred region 
along a shared fundamental niche axis will competitively ex-
clude weaker species but such competitively dominant species, 
having a narrow tolerance for suboptimal points along this 
niche axis, are physiologically excluded at more suboptimal 
regions of environmental space. Species with lower fitness at 
the common preferred region of the niche axis have wider tol-
erance for suboptimal points and so are competitively displaced 
to these suboptimal points resulting in a competitive hierarchy 
(Keddy, 2001). The idea is also implicit in Grime’s idea of the 
trade-off between a species position along stress and compe-
tition gradients. The notion of generalized fertility implicitly 
assumes that the various soil properties impacting plant growth 
(i.e. when all non-soil environmental variables are held con-
stant) represent an example of shared responses to a unidimen-
sional combination of fundamental niche axes of soils.
Researchers working with nutrient solutions (e.g. Austin and 
Austin, 1980; Fichtner and Schulze, 1992) have reported mul-
tiple species having a shared preference in their fundamental 
niche such that all species increase growth with increasing con-
centrations of limiting nutrients until each reaches a species-
specific range of ‘luxury’ consumption, followed by decreases 
in growth due to nutrient toxicity. However, it is extremely dif-
ficult to apply such hydroponic experiments to real soils both 
because nutrient concentrations or fluxes in nutrient solutions 
are not comparable to those in real soils and because natural 
soils rarely, if ever, reach nutrient concentrations that are toxic. 
Reich et al. (2003), working in natural soils, found contrary re-
sults; four out of 32 species (two legumes and two C4 grasses) 
decreased their RGR by 10–35 % following an N fertilization 
treatment while 20 species increased their RGR and eight spe-
cies showed no, or only slight, increases in RGR. Raaimakers 
and Lambers (1996) documented one case of Lecythis corrugata 
with a low RGRmax not responding to increases in soil phos-
phorus while Tapirira obtusa with a high RGRmax strongly re-
sponding to the additions. As pointed out by Craine (2009) it 
is still unclear whether this result constitutes an experimental 
anomaly or an exception. If this exception were common then 
it would constitute a limitation of the fundamental shared niche 
preference of soil ‘fertility’. Furthermore, even if these excep-
tions are more common, we still do not know if such results 
apply along natural gradients in soils since those studies used 
either applied single nutrient additions to a natural soil (N or P) 
or else used hydroponic nutrient solutions.
Daou and Shipley (2019), using 76 natural soils varying 
widely in above-ground biomass production, found that four 
species with contrasting ecology varied their RGR values in 
the same rank order across these soils, thus displaying a shared 
response to soil ‘fertility’. However, those initial results were 
based on only four species. It is possible that a wider selection 
of species could manifest different, and distinct, responses. In 
our results, all nine species with contrasting ecology responded 
to the same soil ‘fertility’ by increasing their RGRs. However, 
this was not true in all soils and for all species, resulting in the 
model of Daou and Shipley (2019) being increasingly rejected 
with an increase in the number of species in the combination. 
Extreme soils in terms of pH generated a statistically detectable 
bidimensional response for three species that previous authors 
(Tyler, 1996; Czarapata, 2005; Grime et al., 2014) had identi-
fied as adapted to particularly acidic or alkaline soils. In such 
cases, i.e. when an ‘extreme’ soil is included in a model along 
with a phytometer that has a particular adaptation to this ex-
treme soil, the SEM hypothesized by Daou and Shipley (2019) 
was rejected. This occurred because the same soil produced dif-
ferent amounts of increase in RGR between species depending 
on the soil pH. This added dimension of soil properties made it 
impossible to use a single latent variable to explain the pattern 
of covariances between the RGRs and explains why the null 
probability of the hypothesized SEM of Daou and Shipley fluc-
tuated depending on the species composition.
The alternative model is composed of two latent variables. 
This alternative model fitted the data well with all combin-
ations of up to eight species but was rejected when U. dioica 
was present. We can suggest two possible reasons for this re-
sult. First, it is possible that strongly nitrophilic species such 
as U. dioica might be unable to grow in the most ‘infertile’ 
soils since they require a higher minimum soil nitrogen supply. 
Other species would increase their RGR values when starting 
at the least fertile soils whereas U.  dioica would not begin 
increasing its RGR until a sufficiently fertile soil was encoun-
tered to begin any growth. This would necessarily generate a 
non-linear relationship of over the entire range of fertility for 
U. dioica. The notion of inclusive fundamental niches, and of 
generalized soil fertility, does not require linearity, but linearity 
is a statistical limitation for the SEM measurement model. 
However, a more prosaic possibility is that the RGR values of 
U. dioica were underestimated in some soils due to the choice 
of the first harvest date. This possibility is supported by two 
observations. First, even the maximum RGR of U.  dioica 
(Appendix 2: Supplementary Data Fig. S4) was lower than six 
of the phytometers even though this species is known to have 
a very high RGRmax (Grime et al., 2014). Second, the RGR of 
U. dioica between the two harvest dates in some soils was vir-
tually zero even though the plants had clearly grown before the 
first harvest. On the other hand, it is undeniable that U. dioica 
had superior growth in several soils, particularly the ‘fertile’ 
soils where several species achieved maximum growth, des-
pite the underestimated measurements. It is therefore difficult 
to draw firm conclusions regarding the rejection of the alter-
native two-latent SEM in the presence of U.  dioica. Further 
experimentation will be needed to test the hypothesis that a 
highly nitrophilic species would respond differently to the ‘fer-
tility’ gradient. However, C. album is also a nitrophilic species 
(Ellenberg N-number 7) that exhibits similar traits to U. dioica 
but had a linear response to soil ‘fertility’ as with the other spe-
cies. Moreover, Fichtner and Schulze (1992) found that species 
having different N-numbers (1 to 9) responded quantitatively 
differently but in the same directions to most levels of NH4NO3 
additions in hydroponic sand culture. As pointed out earlier, 
such hydroponic nitrogen concentrations cannot be quantita-
tively related to available nitrogen flux rates in natural soils.
Species with larger seeds can subsidize growth in infertile 
soils for longer periods of time during initial seedling growth. 
Although we explicitly chose the initial harvest dates of each 
species in order to take into account this possibility and to ex-
clude the initial period in which growth is subsidized by seed 

Lamontagne & Shipley — Generalized soil fertility
35
reserves, we cannot exclude this possibility. However, if this 
effect still existed in our data then this would introduce an extra 
dimension related to seed size and would result in the rejection 
of an SEM that does not include this latent variable. Since this 
did not occur, we conclude that any remaining seed size effects, 
if present, are sufficiently minor as to be undetectable given our 
level of statistical power.
The hypothesis that there exists a single latent property of 
soils (‘generalized’ fertility, FG) causing the correlated growth 
responses of plant species was rejected. We conclude that there 
are at least two underlying dimensions to soil fertility. However, 
such a statistical result does not mean that these added dimen-
sions are equally important in terms of determining soil fertility. 
We found that the original model of Daou and Shipley (2019), 
i.e. when ignoring the second latent variable linked to soil pH, 
resulted in only very minor decreases in predictive ability. The 
correlation between the predicted values of FG using the original 
model of Daou and Shipley (2019) and the predicted values of 
the first latent in the alternative model (i.e. after statistically 
holding constant variation in soil pH) was 0.98 and with a very 
small residual sum of squares.
Such results suggest that the notion of a unidimensional 
‘generalized’ fertility is still valid for most soils and for most 
plant species although some conditions could limit this poten-
tial generalization. First, the model of Daou and Shipley (2019) 
will probably be less precise at the extremes of soil pH and 
when using phytometers that are adapted to such extreme con-
ditions or possibly at the extremes of soil nitrogen flux when 
using strongly nitrophilous species. We can easily imagine 
hypothetical scenarios in which such errors would be more pro-
nounced but we did not encounter such situations in our data. 
In fact, the predicted values of FG from the model of Daou and 
Shipley (2019) were highly robust and largely insensitive to the 
species assemblage. None the less, we note that only three of 
our phytometers responded to pH and the majority of our soils 
(13/25) had close to neutral pH ranges (6.25–7.75) and so com-
binations of soils and species are certainly possible in which 
a one-dimensional model will provide poor predictions of soil 
fertility.
This conclusion is relevant to one of Grime’s foundational 
assumptions of his CSR theory (Grime, 1977). Grime claimed 
that the growth of all plant species could be arranged along a 
gradient of stress, which he defined as any abiotic cause that 
decreases net primary productivity. When all abiotic causes of 
net primary productivity except those inherent in soils are kept 
constant, ‘stress’ becomes the inverse of generalized soil fer-
tility. Based on our results, Grime’s concept of stress, as applied 
to soil fertility, is not strictly valid but is a good approximation 
to most species and most soils.
We envisage two possible extensions of our results. First, 
we need to know how many dimensions (i.e. underlying latent 
variables) are required to completely characterize the growth 
responses of plants to soils and to determine the relative quan-
titative importance of these dimensions in different environ-
ments. Besides soil pH, adaptations to salinity, heavy metals 
or low oxygen concentration could express other dimensions in 
the soil ‘fertility’ concept. If such additional dimensions prove 
to be quantitatively important then they would complicate the 
quantification of soil fertility. If these additional dimensions 
are, like soil pH, quantitatively minor relative to FG, then the 
simpler unidimensional model of Daou and Shipley (2019) 
will still be a useful approximation in most situations. If this 
were the case, then it would be preferable to incorporate only 
phytometers that are not specifically adapted to these additional 
dimensions when quantifying FG but to explicitly include such 
specifically adapted species when quantifying these additional 
dimensions. In this way, it might still be possible to produce a 
general metric of soil fertility that is applicable to plant species 
globally.
SUPPLEMENTARY DATA
Supplementary data are available online at https://academic.
oup.com/aob and consist of the following. Table S1: Additional 
information on phytometer species. Table S2: Sampling sites. 
Figure S1: Temperature variation between experimental blocks 
for day, night and total periods. Figure S2: Relative humidity 
variation between experimental blocks for day, night and total 
periods. Figure S3: Vapour pressure deficit variation between 
experimental blocks for day, night and total periods. Figure 
S4: Measured variation in RGR across species under constant 
conditions in 25 soils from a ‘fertility’ gradient. Figure S5: 
Proportion of the SEM latent variable measurement models ac-
cepted as a function of the number of phytometer species for 
382 possible models. Figure S6: Biplot of a principal compo-
nent analysis of the RGR of nine species on 25 soils from a ‘fer-
tility’ gradient. Figure S7: Proportion of SEM latent variable 
measurement models accepted as a function of the number of 
phytometer species for 256 possible models.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Nicolas Grenier for help in the experimental setup.
FUNDING
The Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of 
Canada (NSERC) funded this research.
LITERATURE CITED
Austin  MP. 1980. Searching for a model for use in vegetation analysis. 
Vegetatio 42: 11–21.
Austin MP, Austin BO. 1980. Behaviour of experimental plant communities 
along a nutrient gradient. Journal of Ecology 68: 891–918.
Austin MP, Smith TM. 1990. A new model for the continuum concept. In: 
Progress in theoretical vegetation science. Berlin: Springer, 35–47.
Bates D, Mächler M, Bolker B, Walker S. 2015. Fitting linear mixed-effects 
models using lme4. Journal of Statistical Software 67:1–48.
Ben-Dor E, Banin A. 1989. Determination of organic matter content in arid-
zone soils using a simple ‘loss-on-ignition’ method. Communications in 
Soil Science and Plant Analysis 20: 1675–1695.
Bollen KA. 2014. Structural equations with latent variables. Chichester: John 
Wiley & Sons.
Cann  DB, Gérin-Lajoie  P. 1942. Soil survey of Stanstead, Richmond, 
Sherbrooke, and Compton counties in the province of Quebec. Quebec: 
Dominion Department of Agriculture.
Clements FE, Goldsmith GW. 1924. The phytometer method in ecology: the 
plant and community as instruments. Washington: Carnegie Institution of 
Washington.

Lamontagne & Shipley — Generalized soil fertility
36
Colwell RK, Fuentes ER. 1975. Experimental studies of the niche. Annual 
Review of Ecology and Systematics 6:281–310.
Craine  JM. 2009. Resource strategies of wild plants. Princeton: Princeton 
University Press.
Czarapata EJ. 2005. Invasive plants of the upper Midwest: an illustrated guide 
to their identification and control. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
Daou L, Shipley B. 2019. The measurement and quantification of generalized 
gradients of soil fertility relevant to plant community ecology. Ecology 
100: e02549.
Ellenberg H. 1974. Indicator values of vascular plants in central Europe. In: 
Indicator values of vascular plants in central Europe, 9.
Fichtner K, Schulze E-D. 1992. The effect of nitrogen nutrition on growth and 
biomass partitioning of annual plants originating from habitats of different 
nitrogen availability. Oecologia 92: 236–241.
Fraser LH. 2020. TRY—A plant trait database of databases. Global change 
biology 26: 189–190.
Garnier  E, Navas  M-L, Grigulis  K. 2016. Plant functional diversity: or-
ganism traits, community structure, and ecosystem properties. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Grace JB. 2006. Structural equation modeling and natural systems. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Grime JP. 1977. Evidence for the existence of three primary strategies in plants 
and its relevance to ecological and evolutionary theory. The American 
Naturalist 111: 1169–1194.
Grime JP, Hodgson JG, Hunt R. 2014. Comparative plant ecology: a func-
tional approach to common British species. Berlin: Springer.
Harpole WS, Ngai JT, Cleland EE, et al. 2011. Nutrient co-limitation of pri-
mary producer communities. Ecology Letters 14:852–862.
Hendershot WH, Lalande H, Duquette M. 2007. Soil reaction and exchange-
able acidity, 2nd edn. In Carter MR, Gregorich EG, eds. Boca Raton: CRC 
Press, Taylor & Francis Group, 173–174.
Hutchinson  GE. 1957. Cold Spring Harbor symposium on quantitative 
biology. Concluding remarks 22: 415–427.
Jones HG. 1992. Plants and microclimate: a quantitative approach to environ-
mental plant physiology. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Keddy  PA. 2001. Competition, 2nd edn. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic 
Publishers.
Kroetsch  D, Wang  C. 2007. Particle size distribution. In Carter  MR, 
Gregorich EG, eds. Soil sampling and methods of analysis, 2nd edn. Boca 
Raton: CRC Press and Taylor and Francis Group, 713–725.
Laliberté E. 2017. Below-ground frontiers in trait-based plant ecology. New 
Phytologist 213: 1597–1603.
Lamontagne L, Martin A, Grenon L, Cossette J-M. 2002. Étude pédologique 
du comté de Saint-Jean (Québec). Agriculture et Agroalimentaire Canada, 
Centre de recherche et de developpement sur les sols et les grandes 
cultures.
Pérez-Harguindeguy N, Diaz S, Gamier E, et al. 2013. New handbook for 
standardised measurement of plant functional traits worldwide. Australian 
Journal of Botany 61: 167–234.
Pierce S, Negreiros D, Cerabolini BE, et al. 2017. A global method for calcu-
lating plant CSR ecological strategies applied across biomes world-wide. 
Functional Ecology 31: 444–457.
Raaimakers D, Lambers H. 1996. Response to phosphorus supply of trop-
ical tree seedlings: a comparison between a pioneer species Tapirira 
obtusa and a climax species Lecythis corrugata. New Phytologist 132: 
97–102.
Reich PB, Buschena C, Tjoelker MG, et al. 2003. Variation in growth rate 
and ecophysiology among 34 grassland and savanna species under con-
trasting N supply: a test of functional group differences. New Phytologist 
157: 617–631.
Rosseel Y. 2012. Lavaan: an R package for structural equation modeling and 
more. Version 0.5–12 (BETA). Journal of Statistical Software 48: 1–36.
Shipley  B. 2016. Cause and correlation in biology: a user’s guide to path 
analysis, structural equations and causal inference with R. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Shipley  B, Bello  FD, Cornelissen  JHC, Laliberté  E, Laughlin  DC, 
Reich PB. 2016. Reinforcing loose foundation stones in trait-based plant 
ecology. Oecologia 180: 923–931.
Tilman D. 1988. Plant strategies and the dynamics and structure of plant com-
munities. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Tyler  G. 1996. Soil chemistry and plant distributions in rock habitats of 
southern Sweden. Nordic Journal of Botany 16: 609–635.
Warnes GR, Bolker B, Lumley T, Warnes MGR. 2015. Package ‘gtools.’ R 
Package version 3. https://github.com/r-gregmisc/gtools
