A global method for calculating plant CSR ecological
strategies applied across biomes world-wide
Simon Pierce*,1, Daniel Negreiros2, Bruno E. L. Cerabolini3, Jens Kattge4, Sandra Dıaz5,
Michael Kleyer6, Bill Shipley7, Stuart Joseph Wright8, Nadejda A. Soudzilovskaia9, Vladimir
G. Onipchenko10, Peter M. van Bodegom9, Cedric Frenette-Dussault7, Evan Weiher11, Bruno
X. Pinho12, Johannes H. C. Cornelissen13, John Philip Grime14, Ken Thompson14, Roderick
Hunt15, Peter J. Wilson14, Gabriella Buffa16, Oliver C. Nyakunga16,17, Peter B. Reich18,19,
Marco Caccianiga20, Federico Mangili20, Roberta M. Ceriani21, Alessandra Luzzaro1,
Guido Brusa3, Andrew Siefert22, Newton P. U. Barbosa2, Francis Stuart Chapin III23, William
K. Cornwell24, Jingyun Fang25, Geraldo Wilson Fernandes2,26, Eric Garnier27, Soizig Le
Stradic28, Josep Pe~nuelas29,30, Felipe P. L. Melo12, Antonio Slaviero16, Marcelo Tabarelli12
and Duccio Tampucci20
1Department of Agricultural and Environmental Sciences (DiSAA), University of Milan, Via G. Celoria 2, I-20133 Milan,
Italy; 2Ecologia Evolutiva e Biodiversidade/DBG, ICB/Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, CP 486, 30161-970 Belo
Horizonte, MG, Brazil; 3Department of Theoretical and Applied Sciences, University of Insubria, Via J.H. Dunant 3,
I-21100 Varese, Italy; 4Max Planck Institute for Biogeochemistry, P.O. Box 100164, 07701 Jena, Germany; 5Instituto
Multidisciplinario de Biologıa Vegetal (CONICET-UNC) and FCEFyN, Universidad Nacional de Cordoba, Av. Velez
Sarsﬁeld 299, 2 piso. 5000, Cordoba, Argentina; 6Department of Biology, Earth and Environmental Sciences,
University of Oldenburg, 26111 Oldenburg, Germany; 7Departement de Biologie, Universite de Sherbrooke,
Sherbrooke, Quebec J1K 2R1, Canada; 8Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, Apartado, Balboa 0843-03092,
Panama; 9Institute of Environmental Sciences CML, Leiden University, Einsteinweg 2, 2333 CC Leiden, The
Netherlands; 10Department of Geobotany, Faculty of Biology, Moscow State University, RU-119991 Moscow, Russia;
11Department of Biology, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire, Eau Claire, Wisconsin 54702-4004, USA; 12Departamento
de Bot^anica, Universidade Federal de Pernambuco, Cidade Universitaria, Recife 50670-901 PE, Brazil; 13Sub-
Department of Systems Ecology, Vrije Universiteit, de Boelelaan 1085, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands;
14Department of Animal and Plant Sciences, University of Shefﬁeld, Alfred Denny Building, Western Bank, Shefﬁeld
S10 2TN, UK; 15Innovation Centre, College of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Exeter, Rennes Drive,
Exeter EX4 4RN, UK; 16Department of Environmental Sciences, Informatics and Statistics, University Ca’Foscari of
Venice, Campo Celestia 2737b – Castello, I-30122 Venice, Italy; 17College of African Wildlife Management, Mweka
(CAWM), P.O. Box 3031, Moshi, Tanzania; 18Department of Forest Resources, University of Minnesota, 530 Cleveland
Ave. N., St. Paul, Minnesota 55108, USA; 19Hawkesbury Institute for the Environment, University of Western Sydney,
Penrith, New South Wales 2751, Australia; 20Department of Biosciences, University of Milan, Via G. Celoria 26, I-20133
Milano, Italy; 21The Native Flora Centre (Centro Flora Autoctona; CFA), c/o Consorzio Parco Monte Barro, via Bertarelli
11, I-23851, Galbiate, LC, Italy; 22Department of Evolution and Ecology, University of California, One Shields Avenue,
Davis, California 95616, USA; 23Department of Biology and Wildlife, Institute of Arctic Biology, University of Alaska
Fairbanks, Fairbanks, Alaska 99775-7000, USA; 24Evolution & Ecology Research Centre, School of Biological, Earth
and Environmental Sciences, University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales 2052, Australia; 25Institute of
Botany, The Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xiangshan, Beijing 100093, China; 26Department of Biology, Stanford
University, Stanford, California 94035, USA; 27CNRS, Centre d’Écologie Fonctionnelle et Évolutive (CEFE) (UMR
5175), 1919 Route de Mende, 34293 Montpellier Cedex 5, France; 28Gembloux Agro-Bio Tech, Biodiversity and
Landscape Unit, University of Liege, Gembloux 5030, Belgium; 29Global Ecology Unit CREAF-CEAB-CSIC-UAB, CSIC,
Cerdanyola del Vallès, 08193 Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain; and 30CREAF, Cerdanyola del Vallès, 08193 Barcelona,
Catalonia, Spain
*Correspondence author. E-mail: simon.pierce@unimi.it
Correction added after online publication on 8 November 2016: author name Geraldo Wilson Fernandez corrected to Geraldo Wilson
Fernandes.
© 2016 The Authors. Functional Ecology © 2016 British Ecological Society
Functional Ecology 2017, 31, 444–457
doi: 10.1111/1365-2435.12722

Summary
1. Competitor, stress-tolerator, ruderal (CSR) theory is a prominent plant functional strategy
scheme previously applied to local ﬂoras. Globally, the wide geographic and phylogenetic cov-
erage of available values of leaf area (LA), leaf dry matter content (LDMC) and speciﬁc leaf
area (SLA) (representing, respectively, interspeciﬁc variation in plant size and conservative vs.
acquisitive resource economics) promises the general application of CSR strategies across
biomes, including the tropical forests hosting a large proportion of Earth’s diversity.
2. We used trait variation for 3068 tracheophytes (representing 198 families, six continents and
14 biomes) to create a globally calibrated CSR strategy calculator tool and investigate strat-
egy–environment relationships across biomes world-wide.
3. Due to disparity in trait availability globally, co-inertia analysis was used to check corre-
spondence between a ‘wide geographic coverage, few traits’ data set and a ‘restricted coverage,
many traits’ subset of 371 species for which 14 whole-plant, ﬂowering, seed and leaf traits (in-
cluding leaf nitrogen content) were available. CSR strategy/environment relationships within
biomes were investigated using fourth-corner and RLQ analyses to determine strategy/climate
specializations.
4. Strong, signiﬁcant concordance (RV = 0597; P < 00001) was evident between the 14
trait multivariate space and when only LA, LDMC and SLA were used.
5. Biomes such as tropical moist broadleaf forests exhibited strategy convergence (i.e. clustered
around a CS/CSR median; C:S:R = 43:42:15%), with CS-selection associated with warm,
stable situations (lesser temperature seasonality), with greater annual precipitation and poten-
tial evapotranspiration. Other biomes were characterized by strategy divergence: for example,
deserts varied between xeromorphic perennials such as Larrea divaricata, classiﬁed as
S-selected (C:S:R = 1:99:0%) and broadly R-selected annual herbs (e.g. Claytonia perfoliata;
R/CR-selected; C:S:R = 21:0:79%). Strategy convergence was evident for several growth
habits (e.g. trees) but not others (forbs).
6. The CSR strategies of vascular plants can now be compared quantitatively within and
between biomes at the global scale. Through known linkages between underlying leaf traits
and growth rates, herbivory and decomposition rates, this method and the strategy–environ-
ment relationships it elucidates will help to predict which kinds of species may assemble in
response to changes in biogeochemical cycles, climate and land use.
Key-words: community assembly, comparative ecology, Grime’s CSR triangle, plant eco-
nomics spectrum, plant functional type, survival strategy, universal adaptive strategy theory
Introduction
A common framework for the comparison of organism
function within and between ecosystems world-wide can
potentially be achieved using the continuous variation evi-
dent along spectra of functional (adaptive) traits. The
main plant trait spectra evident globally represent varia-
tion in plant resource economics (a trade-oﬀbetween traits
conferring resource acquisition and internal conservation)
and the size of plants and plant organs (Dıaz et al. 2016).
These two principal functional trait spectra can be used to
assign species a position within multivariate space relative
to other species and concurrently to allocate discrete eco-
logical strategy classes (Pierce et al. 2013). These classes
are more precise than traditional life-form or ‘plant func-
tional type’ categories characterized by constant attributes
(van Bodegom et al. 2012; Soudzilovskaia et al. 2013).
Functional
trait
spectra
may
also
better
reﬂect
the
acquisition, use and cycling of energy and matter within
the ecosystem. For instance, plant resource economics is a
particularly important determinant of photosynthetic car-
bon ﬁxation, biomass production, litter decomposition and
thus ecosystem nutrient availabilities (Grime et al. 1997;
Wright et al. 2004; Cornwell et al. 2008; Reich 2014). Eco-
logical strategies reﬂect viable suites of traits that impact
ﬁtness and survival and can also provide a conceptual link
between ecology and natural selection. Indeed, recent stud-
ies underline the evolutionary history of functional traits
(Cornelissen & Cornwell 2014; Cornwell et al. 2014; Flores
et al. 2014; Dıaz et al. 2016) and the consistent co-occur-
rence of particular traits and trait values (Reich 2014; Ver-
heijen et al. 2016). It is now clear that plant size and
economics are the most prominent aspects of plant func-
tional variation globally (Dıaz et al. 2016), although there
is currently no consensus on any particular ecological
strategy scheme that can potentially explain why certain
© 2016 The Authors. Functional Ecology © 2016 British Ecological Society, Functional Ecology, 31, 444–457
Global plant CSR analysis
445
 13652435, 2017, 2, Downloaded from https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1365-2435.12722, Wiley Online Library on [07/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

combinations of trait values are consistently observed
under similar circumstances.
A prominent strategy scheme is Grime’s (1974, 1977,
2001) competitor, stress tolerator, ruderal (CSR) theory (re-
viewed by Grime & Pierce 2012), in which the three princi-
pal strategies represent viable trait combinations arising
under conditions of competition, abiotic limitation to
growth
or
periodic
biomass
destruction,
respectively.
Speciﬁcally, C-selected ‘competitors’ are said to survive in
relatively stable, productive habitats via investment of
resources in continued vegetative growth and rapid attain-
ment of large individual and organ size to aid resource pre-
emption. S-selected ‘stress tolerators’ protect metabolic per-
formance in variable and resource-poor environments by
investing mainly in capacity to retain resources and repair
cellular components in dense, persistent tissues. They may
be small or gradually accrue large size over a long life span.
R-selection, or ruderalism, involves investment of a large
proportion of resources not in the individual but in propag-
ules from which the population can regenerate in the face of
repeated lethal biomass destruction events, or disturbances.
The world-wide leaf economics spectrum, itself a part of the
‘fast–slow’ plant economics spectrum (Reich 2014), and the
leaf size spectrum are major components of CSR strategy
variation (Pierce et al. 2012).
A number of CSR analysis methods have been devel-
oped (Grime, Hodgson & Hunt 1988; Hodgson et al. 1999;
Pierce et al. 2013) and have been applied as practical tools
to characterize, map and compare vegetation function
(Bunce et al. 1999; Hunt et al. 2004; Schmidtlein, Feil-
hauer & Bruelheide 2012). They have also been used to
investigate and interpret a range of community processes,
such as resistance and resilience, coexistence, succession
and the relationship between species richness and produc-
tivity (Leps, Osbornova-Kosinova & Rejmanek 1982; Cac-
cianiga et al. 2006; Cerabolini et al. 2016). However, each
CSR analysis method has drawbacks, and all have been
calibrated using local ﬂoras. Application of CSR analysis
is therefore typically applied to herbaceous vegetation in
Europe (but see Negreiros et al. 2014; de Paula et al.
2015), while the majority of plant diversity is found in
tropical forests (Kreft & Jetz 2007).
Potential for a global system for comparative plant ecol-
ogy lies in the fact that variation in leaf economics and leaf
size is a ubiquitous phenomenon evident not just for tem-
perate herbs but also for trees, lianas and understorey
herbs in tropical forests (Santiago & Wright 2007). Indeed,
other widely used traits are not applicable across life-
forms: for example, plant height cannot be measured for
aquatic species, whereas leaf traits allow aquatic and ter-
restrial species to be compared on an equal footing (Pierce
et al. 2012). Leaf area (LA), a key determinant of capacity
to intercept light, is one of the most widely available indi-
cators of the size spectrum (Dıaz et al. 2016). Large values
of speciﬁc leaf area (SLA) and, alternatively, of leaf dry
matter content (LDMC) are highly representative of the
opposite extremes of the economics spectrum and are
amongst the most widely available traits in the global
TRY plant functional trait data base (see list at www.try-
db.org/de/TabDetails.php; Kattge et al. 2011). Data for
other key traits such as leaf nitrogen content (LNC) have
a much more restricted geographic and phylogenetic cover-
age (Dıaz et al. 2016).
Any generally applicable method for calculating CSR
strategies must include ubiquitous traits that can represent
the extremes of a trade-oﬀbetween large size and conser-
vative vs. acquisitive economics. Leaf size and economics
traits are widely available, applicable to a range of life-
forms and are highly representative of plant functional
trade-oﬀs. Speciﬁcally, in the European ﬂora species char-
acterized by high LA do not exhibit high SLA or high
LDMC, species exhibiting high LDMC all have small,
dense leaves and species with high SLA are small and exhi-
bit low LDMC (Cerabolini et al. 2010). These trade-oﬀs at
the level of the leaf are associated with whole-plant and
reproductive trade-oﬀs (e.g. species with large leaves tend
to have large seeds; Pierce et al. 2014a; Dıaz et al. 2016),
and it is reasonable to expect leaf-level variation to reﬂect
a substantial portion of overall plant variation (Dıaz et al.
2016).
The main aim of the current study was to examine the
trade-oﬀbetween LA, LDMC and SLA variation world-
wide in order to assign combinations of leaf traits within
the triangle of CSR strategies, and to use this to produce
a readily applicable practical tool. This builds on the pre-
vious CSR classiﬁcation system of Pierce et al. (2013) but
upscaling of the method using a global calibration has a
number of advantages. By using the absolute limits of
plant functional trait spectra evident in the world ﬂora,
rather than local data ranges, the method is essentially
altered from one that compares species relative to one
another to become a method bounded by the entire
range of plant size and economics currently known for
vascular plants (i.e. species are compared against absolute
limits). This means that ecologists working in biogeo-
graphically distinct contexts world-wide will have a com-
mon
reference
frame.
As
CSR
theory
predicts
that
strategies arise consistently in response to particular con-
ditions, lessons learned in one location are potentially
transferable to functionally similar vegetation found on
diﬀerent continents.
At local scales, an average CSR strategy for a plant
community can be used to provide a ‘functional summary’
of vegetation and allow comparison of contrasting circum-
stances (e.g. Caccianiga et al. 2006). A global methodology
could similarly provide functional summaries at larger
scales and allow investigation of general relationships
between plant functioning and broad-scale environmental
parameters operating within and between biomes. There is
good reason to expect that a plant functional signal should
be apparent even at the scale of biomes. For example, as
woody species vary between C- and S-selected, but no rud-
eral tree species are apparent (at least in Europe; Pierce
et al. 2013) biomes dominated by woody species should
© 2016 The Authors. Functional Ecology © 2016 British Ecological Society, Functional Ecology, 31, 444–457
446
S. Pierce et al.
 13652435, 2017, 2, Downloaded from https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1365-2435.12722, Wiley Online Library on [07/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

exhibit clustering of species around the CS-selected region
of the CSR triangle (whereas herbaceous species in Europe
exhibit a much wider range of strategies; Pierce et al.
2013). Furthermore, strategies can be expected to be medi-
ated by climatic factors such as temperature, potential
evapotranspiration and water availability, which are prin-
cipal determinants of plant survival and vegetation distri-
bution. However, the relationship between plant primary
strategies and climate has not previously been investigated,
despite the potential importance of plant responses to cli-
matic changes in shaping future vegetation. For the present
study, a general prediction can be made that biomes charac-
terized by climatic extremes should include species with a
greater degree of functional specialization. For example, in
the desert biome plants survive using contrasting life histo-
ries that can be summarized as essentially ‘ephemeral thero-
phyte’ or ‘long-lived and durable’ (Chesson et al. 2004). We
can thus predict that the CSR signature of the desert biome
will be polarized between extreme R- and S-selected strate-
gies, and that these too are correlated with climatic factors,
particularly precipitation seasonality. Montane grasslands
and alpine herbaceous vegetation are known to exhibit
CSR strategies that range between R- and S-selection, with
C-selection relatively rare (Caccianiga et al. 2006; Pierce
et al. 2007a,b), but these studies have investigated speciﬁc
plant communities and have not enjoyed the opportunity
for comparison with the range of strategies evident within
the biome as a whole, or indeed with other biomes. Certain
biomes, such as tropical moist broadleaf forest, have yet to
be interpreted in a plant functional strategy/climate context.
Thus, a secondary aim of the present study was to apply the
global CSR analysis tool to determine whether it is possible
to discern broad patterns of plant functional variability and
specialization in response to climatic factors operating in
biomes world-wide.
Materials and methods
TRAIT DATA
A total of 116 979 plant functional trait records, composed of
38 835 individual measurements of leaf area (LA; mm2), 48 468
measurements of SLA (mm2 mg1) and 29 676 of LDMC (%),
measured from plants growing in nature were obtained from the
TRY global trait data base (www.try-db.org; Kattge et al. 2011).
This included traits from preceding data bases such as the LEDA
traitbase (www.leda-traitbase.org; Kleyer et al. 2008). The data set
included records from all continents except Antarctica, from 16
countries and several biogeographical regions within many of
these countries (species native range and typical biome informa-
tion is summarized in Appendix Table S1, Supporting Informa-
tion). A total of 3068 species growing in a wide range of biomes,
including tropical woody vegetation of various types, were repre-
sented by complete sets of LA, LDMC and SLA data. Of these
species, a subset of 371 species was available for which sets of 14
whole-plant, leaf, ﬂowering and seed traits were available, includ-
ing the additional traits leaf nitrogen concentration (LNC), leaf
carbon concentration (LCC), leaf dry weight (LDW), canopy
height (CH), lateral spread (LS), ﬂowering start (FS), ﬂowering
period (FP), seed mass (SM), seed volume (SVo), total mass of
seeds (TMS) and seed variance (SVa) (these data are available
from the TRY data base and are also published as an appendix to
Pierce et al. 2014a).
The number of replicate values for each trait of each species
was typically between 10 and 15, but varied from a minimum of 3
to
a
maximum
of
349.
Nomenclature
is
reported
in
Appendix Table S1 and follows the Missouri Botanical Garden
Tropicos system (www.tropicos.org). Additional taxonomic and
growth habit information was obtained from the Encyclopedia of
Life (www.eol.org) and GBIF (www.gbif.org/species/search).
PROD UCTION OF A GLOBAL CSR AN ALYSIS TOOL
Global calibration of the CSR tool involved an initial multivariate
analysis (PCA) of the key leaf traits (as a method of determining
the three-way relationship between traits rather than as an analy-
sis of plant adaptation per se), regression of trait values against
PCA axes and the use of these regression equations to produce a
Microsoft Excel spreadsheet. This spreadsheet aims to allow novel
target species to be compared against the multivariate space over
which the global data set was ordinated.
First, a centred Pearson PCA was performed using
XLSTAT
2012.5.01 software (Addinsoft, New York,
NY, USA)
and
Varimax rotation applied to the ﬁrst two axes. As a small
number of species with disproportionately large leaves are evi-
dent in the world ﬂora, with most species exhibiting smaller
leaves, trait values were transformed to constrain the most
extreme values and to provide distributions as close as possible
to normality prior to PCA. In this case, LA data were stan-
dardized using the maximum value, followed by square root
transformation (Podani 2007). LDMC data were logit trans-
formed (logit transformation is considered a more appropriate
method for proportion data with respect to traditional arcsine
transformation; Warton & Hui 2011), and SLA data were log
transformed.
Transformed trait values were regressed against values of the
PCA axis along which the trait exhibited maximum variance (e.g.
logSLA against PCA1). The regression equation describing the
curve of best ﬁt was then incorporated into a Microsoft Excel
spreadsheet that used the equation to compare trait values for
any given target species against the global spectrum for that trait.
This eﬀectively assigned target species three covarying dimen-
sions: a ‘LA dimension’ based on PCA2, a ‘LDMC dimension’
based on positive variability along PCA 1 and a ‘SLA dimension’
based on negative variation along PCA1. As PCA values may be
negative or positive, the minimum (i.e. the most negative) values
along PCA axes were then determined for each trait and these
were used as a constant, added to all values of each trait in order
to translate the trait dimensions into an entirely positive space.
The next spreadsheet function determined the maximum values,
giving the range of values for each trait. In order to produce
ternary coordinates (i.e. three coordinates for a triangular graph),
a function was then added to the spreadsheet that summed the
three dimensions and divided by 100, allowing determination of
the proportional contributions of LA, LDMC and SLA for each
species. Thus, the resulting triangular ordination of species repre-
sented a ‘trade-oﬀtriangle’ against which target species can be
compared.
As no species exhibited zero leaf area or mass, it was not
possible for species to be ordinated along the axes themselves
nor at the apices of the trade-oﬀtriangle. Thus, a spreadsheet
function was implemented that essentially expanded, along the
three axes, the space occupied by species to ﬁll the entire ternary
plot, resulting in full occupation of the triangle and thus posi-
tioning of species within the CSR triangle. This was achieved by
multiplication of all values by a rescaling constant that allowed
the maximum and minimum values to fully occupy the available
© 2016 The Authors. Functional Ecology © 2016 British Ecological Society, Functional Ecology, 31, 444–457
Global plant CSR analysis
447
 13652435, 2017, 2, Downloaded from https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1365-2435.12722, Wiley Online Library on [07/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

range. The ﬁnal spreadsheet (Appendix Table S2: ‘StrateFy’) is
available online as Supporting Information and incorporates all
functions to easily allow the CSR analysis of novel plant species
from leaf traits.
CORRESPONDENCE BETWEEN VARIATION IN 3 AND 14
FUNCTIONAL TRAITS
To test whether the three key leaf traits (i.e. LA, LDMC and
SLA) can provide a reliable multivariate structure for assigning
general ecological strategies to plants, we used the subset of spe-
cies for which 14 vegetative and reproductive trait data were avail-
able without any missing data (see Pierce et al. 2014a). To this
end, a co-inertia analysis (hereafter, COIA) is a general and ﬂexi-
ble method that measures the concordance (i.e. co-structure)
between two multivariate data sets that share the same objects (in
this case, species; Dray, Chessel & Thioulouse 2003). This
approach was applied to quantify and test the association between
two matrices: (i) three traits per 371 species; and (ii) fourteen traits
for the same 371 species. The COIA provides a correlation coeﬃ-
cient (‘RV’) that measures the strength of the association between
matrices. This coeﬃcient is bounded between zero (i.e. no associa-
tion) and one (i.e. maximum association), with signiﬁcance
(P-value) accessed by a Monte Carlo test (with 100 000 permuta-
tions). To implement the COIA, a PCA was used for both
matrices after data transformation to improve normality. Analyses
were carried out using R software (R Development Core Team
2013) with the ADE4 package (Dray & Dufour 2007).
COMPARISON WITH A LOCALLY CALIBRATED METHOD
In addition to the new globally calibrated method, CSR ternary
triplets were also calculated using the local tool of Pierce et al.
(2013; calibrated with six traits for the Flora of Italy) and regres-
sion of values obtained using both methods was also performed in
order to allow comparison between the locally and globally cali-
brated techniques.
A TEST USING KNOWN VEGETATION CHANGES ALON G
SUCCESSION
In order to test whether the CSR analysis method agreed with
expectations of vegetation responses to an environmental gradi-
ent, the StrateFy tool was used to calculate CSR strategies for
the species characteristic of four phytosociological syntaxa (i.e.
plant communities sensu Braun-Blanquet 1925) associated with a
sequence of vegetation development encompassing a primary suc-
cession and related pasture vegetation. Speciﬁcally, in the Euro-
pean Alps, mobile screes represent highly disturbed environments
where vegetation is composed of annual therophytes (phytosocio-
logical syntaxon Thlasietea rotundifolii Br.-Bl. et al. 1947). With
the development of the vegetation and stabilization of scree deb-
ris (and where topography and aspect result in long-lying snow
cover), snowbed vegetation arises and is characterized by a mix-
ture of nanophanerophytes and hemicryptophytes (Salicetea her-
baceae Br.-Bl. et al. 1947; Tomaselli 1997). This can develop
further on acid, nutrient poor soils into a climax vegetation dom-
inated by slow-growing graminoids such as the sedge Carex cur-
vula and the grass Festuca halleri (phytosociological alliance
Caricion curvulae Br.-Bl. 1925) (Tomaselli & Rossi 1994). When
these unproductive siliceous grasslands experience grazing by
large domestic livestock, dominance shifts towards the rhizoma-
tous mat-grass Nardus stricta and the vegetation alliance is char-
acterized by greater ﬂoristic richness than that evident for
Caricion curvulae (i.e. syntaxon Nardion strictae Br.-Bl. in Br.Bl.
& Jenny 1926; Gennai et al. 2014). Grazing of alpine pastures
increases nutrient turnover rates and selective grazing and the
patchy
concentration
of
nutrients
following
defecation
are
thought to provide contrasting microsites for a range of life histo-
ries, fostering species richness, but with dominant grass species
nonetheless exhibiting conservative leaf economics and stress tol-
erance (Pierce et al. 2007a,b). We expected that along this vegeta-
tion sequence plant communities would shift from R-selection
towards S-selection and ultimately, in the Nardion pasture, to an
intermediate, relatively C-selected mean strategy with a greater
range of strategies apparent.
GLOBAL FOURTH -CORNER AND R LQ ANALYSES OF
CSR STRATEGY/ENVIRONMENT RELATIONSHIPS
Globally, the combined fourth-corner and RLQ method of Dray
et al. (2014) was used to test the relationship between CSR strate-
gies and environmental variation within biomes. Fourteen biomes
were deﬁned according to Olson et al. (2001) and are listed as part
of Appendix Table S1. Information regarding the biome(s) within
the native range of each species was obtained from the comparison
of the global distribution of biomes with the georeferenced records
of each species (from GBIF) occurring inside its native range. The
native range of each species was obtained from sources such as
GRIN taxonomy for plants (www.ars-grin.gov/cgi-bin/npgs/html/
tax_search.pl?language=en), eMonocot (http://emonocot.org) and
Catalogue of Life (www.catalogueoﬂife.org/col/search/all). Addi-
tionally, we investigated the CSR strategies evident for life-form
categories (tree, shrub, liana, graminoid, forb (i.e. herbaceous
dicot), herbaceous vine, annual and biennial herb, perennial herb)
and for taxonomic families that were represented by a minimum of
30 species in the data set.
The fourth-corner and RLQ approach involved the simultane-
ous use of three matrices: (i) a ‘community’ matrix with sample
sites in rows and species in columns; (ii) an environmental matrix
with sample sites in rows and environmental variables in columns;
and (iii) a functional matrix with traits in rows and species in col-
umns. The fourth-corner approach tests the relationship between
each species trait and each environmental variable, while the RLQ
analysis tests the co-structure between all species traits with all
environmental variables (Dray et al. 2014).
The functional matrix was deﬁned by the 3068 species with
three traits (i.e. C, S, R percentages). The 14 world biomes (de-
ﬁned by Olson et al. 2001) were treated as sampling sites, and
the presence (incidence) of the 3068 species in these biomes was
equivalent to a community matrix. To generate the environmen-
tal matrix, we assessed average environmental characteristics for
each biome using bioclimatic variables (temperature seasonality,
annual mean temperature, precipitation seasonality and annual
precipitation) for the recent half-century (1950–2001) obtained
from the WorldClim project (Hijmans et al. 2005), in addition to
global potential evapo-transpiration (Trabucco & Zomer 2009),
at a spatial resolution of 00083° (~1 km2). Temperature and pre-
cipitation seasonality was calculated as the standard deviation of
monthly values multiplied by 100 and precipitation seasonality as
the coeﬃcient of variation of monthly values (Hijmans et al.
2005). In order to obtain unbiased averages for each biome, we
created 200 000 uniformly random points for the entire globe,
covering all terrestrial biomes, using the package gismo for R (R
Development Core Team 2013). To conduct the RLQ analysis, a
correspondence analysis was used for the community matrix,
while a PCA was used for the functional and environmental
matrices. For the PCA applied to the functional matrix, species
were weighted by their overall relative frequency across biomes
(i.e. the number of biomes in which each species occurred),
whereas for the PCA applied to the environmental matrix,
biomes
were
weighted
by
the
overall
frequency
of
species
observed (Dray & Dufour 2007). Separate fourth-corner and
© 2016 The Authors. Functional Ecology © 2016 British Ecological Society, Functional Ecology, 31, 444–457
448
S. Pierce et al.
 13652435, 2017, 2, Downloaded from https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1365-2435.12722, Wiley Online Library on [07/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

RLQ analyses were conducted for each biome, each analysis
involving only species occurring in that biome. Signiﬁcance was
obtained through a Monte Carlo test based on the total co-iner-
tia, using the combined null models 2 (permutation of sampling
sites) and 4 (permutation of species) with 50 000 permutations
per test (Dray et al. 2014). Analyses were carried out using R
software (R Development Core Team 2013) with the ade4
package (Dray & Dufour 2007).
Results
‘WIDE COVERAGE, FEW TRAITS’ VS. ‘RESTRICTED
COVERAGE, MANY TR AITS’
We found a strong and highly signiﬁcant concordance
between the multivariate space produced by three and 14
traits (RV = 0597; P < 0001; Fig. 1): that is, there was a
relatively small loss of information when only three leaf
traits were used instead of 14 traits, and the multivariate
plant functional space described by leaf traits alone was
representative of whole-plant functional variation (Fig. 1).
A GLOBAL CSR ANALYSIS METHOD
The three-way trade-oﬀbetween LA, LDMC and SLA for
the 3068 species of the main global data set, presented in
Fig. 2, conﬁrmed that variation in LA was orthogonal to
variation in SLA and LDMC in the world ﬂora. Indeed,
SLA and LDMC values ranged in opposite directions
between two extremes (negative and positive, respectively)
of the ﬁrst axis of variability (PCA1) and thus an axis of
leaf economics (Fig. 2a; for eigenvalues see Fig. 2b). The
second axis of variability (PCA2) was delimited by leaf
area, with large leaves evident only at intermediate leaf eco-
nomics (Fig. 2a): species with extremely acquisitive or
extremely
conservative
leaves
were
consistently
small
(Fig. 2a), conﬁrming that high values of LA, SLA and
LDMC were mutually exclusive in the global data set. In
other words, dense, tough leaves were not large; soft,
acquisitive leaves were not tough and conservative; only
leaves with intermediate economics were large.
Transformed leaf area was highly and positively corre-
lated with PCA2 (R2 = 0998, P < 00001) following the
polynomial linear equation detailed in Fig. S1a. Trans-
formed LDMC was strongly and positively correlated with
PCA1 (R2 = 0794, P < 00001) following the equation pre-
sented in Fig. S1b. Log SLA was strongly and negatively
correlated (R2 = 0782, P < 00001) with PCA1 following
the equation shown in Fig. S1c. These equations allowed
comparison of target plant species with the trade-oﬀ
between these traits and thus determination of the CSR
strategy (see Fig. 3 and the practical tool available as
Appendix S2; ‘StrateFy’).
COMPARISON WITH A LOCALLY CALIBRATED METHOD
When the degree of C-, S- and R-selection calculated by
the globally calibrated method were regressed against C, S
and R values calculated using the method of Pierce et al.
(2013), the results were strongly and positively correlated
with one another. Speciﬁcally, for the degree of C-selection
determined by both methods, R2 = 0920, F = 93981,
Fig. 1. Projection of two main axes of co-inertia analysis (COIA)
for 371 species: variable loadings for data sets including (a) three
traits, (b) 14 traits and (c) a joint representation of species scores
from the three trait (dots) and 14 trait (arrow tip) data sets. Per-
centage of variance explained by each axis (eigenvalues) are shown
in the axis legend. Traits are CH: canopy height, FP: ﬂowering per-
iod, FS: ﬂowering start, LA: leaf area, LCC: leaf carbon concentra-
tion, LDMC: leaf dry matter content, LDW: leaf dry weight, LNC:
leaf nitrogen concentration, LS: lateral spread, SLA: speciﬁc leaf
area, SM: seed mass, SVo: apparent seed volume, SVa: seed
variance, TMS: total mass of seeds. Data were log transformed to
conform to normality and to constrain extreme values.
© 2016 The Authors. Functional Ecology © 2016 British Ecological Society, Functional Ecology, 31, 444–457
Global plant CSR analysis
449
 13652435, 2017, 2, Downloaded from https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1365-2435.12722, Wiley Online Library on [07/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

P < 00001,
for
S-selection
R2 = 0891,
F = 249683,
P < 00001 and for R-selection R2 = 0866, F = 19 7251,
P < 00001 (Fig. S2).
A TEST USING KNOWN VEGETATION CHANGES ALON G
SUCCESSION
The CSR strategies evident for species characteristic of pri-
mary succession from scree vegetation to siliceous alpine
grassland, terminating with alpine Nardus pasture, are evi-
dent in Fig. 4. Pioneer vegetation on screes, as expected,
was characterized by mainly R-selected species and exhib-
ited an R-selected mean strategy (C:S:R = 12:0:88 %).
Species characteristic of vegetation at an intermediate
point along the succession exhibited a mean strategy of SR
(4:58:37%) and species of the climax vegetation exhibited
a high degree of stress tolerance (mean strategy = 6:94:0%;
Fig. 4a). Under pasture, siliceous alpine grassland species
exhibited
a
wider
range
of
strategies
encompassing
C/CR-selected
species
such
as
Gentiana
punctata,
S-selected Nardus stricta (3:97:0%), R/CR-selected species
such as Campanula barbata (37:0:63%) and a mean of CR/
CSR-selection (40:24:36%; Fig. 4a). The overall trajectory
of primary succession in this context is thus characterized
by an initial shift from R- to S-selection, with management
increasing the range of strategies present and including a
higher degree of C-selection relative to the other vegetation
types.
CSR STRATEGIES EVIDENT WITHIN BIOMES GLOBALLY
The CSR strategies evident within biomes were calculated
using the globally calibrated CSR analysis tool and are
shown in Fig. 5 (details of CSR strategies for each species
within every biome are listed in Appendix S1). Tropical
and subtropical broadleaf forest (both moist and dry forest
biomes) exhibited a broad range of strategies but these
were highly clustered around CS/CSR-selected median
strategies (for both biomes, median C:S:R = 43:42:15%;
Fig. 5a,b). Tropical and subtropical coniferous forests also
exhibited a median CS/CSR strategy that reﬂected a
slightly greater number of S- and R-selected species at the
expense of C-selection (32:46:22%; Fig. 5c). Tropical and
subtropical grasslands, savannas and shrublands were
highly represented by CS/CSR-selected species (34:51:15%;
Fig. 5g). In contrast, biomes such as temperate broadleaf
and mixed forests (Fig. 5d) and temperate coniferous for-
ests (Fig. 5e) exhibited a SR/CSR-selected median strategy
and a wide range of CSR strategies for individual species,
ﬁlling the CSR triangle relatively uniformly. This denoted
the presence and the even distribution of the full gamut of
ecological strategies in these biomes. Deserts also exhibited
a range of CSR strategies, with a CSR-selected median
(Fig. 5m). Other biomes exhibited variation between rela-
tively
restricted
strategy
variation
to
wide
variation
(Fig. 5).
Fourth-corner and RLQ analyses for tropical and sub-
tropical broadleaf forest (both moist and dry forest
biomes) (Fig. 6a,b) showed that C- and S-selection were
highly correlated with environmental variables: positively
with annual mean temperature, annual precipitation and
global potential evapo-transpiration, but negatively with
temperature seasonality (P < 005, and in some cases
P < 001 or P < 0001). R-selection exhibited the exact
opposite association with environmental variables. In con-
trast, no signiﬁcant correlation was found between CSR
strategies and environmental variables in temperate broad-
leaf and coniferous forests (Fig. 6d,e). A wide range of
CSR strategies was evident in the desert biome that was
signiﬁcantly correlated with environmental variables: C-
and S-selection were positively correlated with annual
mean temperature, precipitation seasonality and potential
evapo-transpiration, and negatively with temperature sea-
sonality, with R-selection exhibiting contrasting correla-
tions with these factors (Fig. 6l).
CSR STRATEGIES WITHIN GROWTH HABIT
CATEGORIES AND FAMILIES
Diﬀerent growth habit categories exhibited variation in
overall and median CSR strategies (Fig. S3). Trees were
clustered around a CS median strategy, with no R-selected
trees apparent (C:S:R = 43:47:10%; Fig. S3a) and shrubs
centred around an S/CSR strategy (20:61:20%; Fig. S3b).
Lianas were relatively specialized and clustered around
CS/CSR-selection
(52:35:14%;
Fig.
S3c).
Graminoids
exhibited a strong S-selected component, with variation
around an S/CSR median strategy (14:56:29%; Fig. S3d).
Forbs (herbaceous dicots) occupied the entire triangle and
exhibited
a
comparatively
generalist
R/CSR
strategy
(30:20:51%; Fig. S3e). Annual herbs exhibited an R/CSR
Fig. 2. (a) Biplot showing the relationship between the three traits
leaf area (LA), leaf dry matter content (LDMC) and speciﬁc leaf
area (SLA) for 3068 tracheophyte species from across the world
used as a basis for calibrating the CSR classiﬁcation method (prin-
cipal components analysis; PCA), and b) eigenvalues for PCA
axes. Data were transformed to constrain extreme values (LA was
standardized using the maximum value and then square root
transformed, SLA was log transformed and LDMC logit trans-
formed).
© 2016 The Authors. Functional Ecology © 2016 British Ecological Society, Functional Ecology, 31, 444–457
450
S. Pierce et al.
 13652435, 2017, 2, Downloaded from https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1365-2435.12722, Wiley Online Library on [07/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

median
strategy
(25:14:61%),
with
species
clustered
towards R-selection (Fig. S3g). Perennial herbs had an
SR/CSR median strategy (25:35:41%) and occupied the
entire triangle (Fig. S3h).
Some plant families were predominantly R-selected (e.g.
Brassicaceae, Campanulaceae, Caryophyllaceae, Plantagi-
naceae; Fig. S4d,e,g,p), and others were dominated by S-
selected species (Cyperaceae, Ericaceae, Juncaceae, Sali-
caceae; Fig. S4h,i,l,w) or were clustered around a relatively
S-selected
point
(e.g.
Rosaceae;
28:49:2%,
S/CSR;
Fig. S4u). Poaceae exhibited a median strategy of S/CSR
(15:53:33%; Fig. S4q) and varied greatly between strategy
extremes. A small number of families exhibited a relatively
high degree of C-selection, such as Apiaceae (47:25:28%,
C/CSR; Fig. S4a).
Discussion
The globally calibrated CSR analysis method allowed
strategies to be determined for a wide range of vascular
plant species world-wide from habitats as diverse as
tropical broadleaf rain forest, desert shrublands, man-
groves and alpine pasture. The use of a small number of
leaf traits has the advantage that large numbers of individ-
uals or species comprising vegetation can be rapidly mea-
sured and compared. Indeed, studies of strategy variation
within
and
between
plant
communities
are
currently
applied inconsistently due to methodological constraints
and measurement issues, but many of these can now be
avoided due to the simplicity of the new method. For
example,
Schmidtlein,
Feilhauer
&
Bruelheide
(2012)
mapped CSR strategies across landscapes as a general indi-
cator of changes in plant function across a mosaic of envi-
ronments, but the traits used, and thus the overall
analysis, were limited to herbaceous species and grassland
vegetation. The current method will allow functional com-
parison of a much more inclusive set of vegetation types
world-wide and will allow plant function to be considered
in the broadest possible context. Despite the simplicity of
the method, we have shown it to broadly represent plant
functioning and to be consistent with expected patterns of
plant function and along primary succession as predicted
Fig. 3. Relative proportion (%) of C-, S- and R-selection for 3068 tracheophyte species measured from natural habitats across the world,
using the globally calibrated CSR analysis tool ‘StrateFy’. Species names represent examples of the seven secondary CSR strategy classes
(C, CS, CR, CSR, S, SR and R) suggested by Grime (2001).
© 2016 The Authors. Functional Ecology © 2016 British Ecological Society, Functional Ecology, 31, 444–457
Global plant CSR analysis
451
 13652435, 2017, 2, Downloaded from https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1365-2435.12722, Wiley Online Library on [07/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

by traditional phytosociological interpretation of vegeta-
tion.
Application of the CSR analysis to biomes world-wide
revealed that certain biomes are characterized by relatively
functionally restricted ﬂoras (i.e. clustered within particular
zones of the CSR triangle), such as tropical and subtropical
grasslands (median strategy CS/CSR; Fig. 5g). Others,
sometimes despite the prevalence of extreme abiotic condi-
tions, host comparatively uniform strategy distributions
and wide variation within the CSR triangle. For example,
deserts and xeric shrublands (Fig. 5m) include highly con-
trasting CSR strategies that reﬂected the presence of both
xeromorphic stress tolerators (e.g. Larrea divaricata; C:S:
R = 1:99:0 %, S) and ruderal annual herbs (e.g. Claytonia
perfoliata, 21:0:79%, R/CR; Appendix S1), some of which
occupy locally humid sites (e.g. R/CR-selected Mimulus
guttatus). The idea that biological diversity in arid environ-
ments depends on highly contrasting perennial and annual
life histories, microsite diﬀerences and niche diﬀerentiation
is already well-established (e.g. Chesson et al. 2004). The
value of CSR analysis is that it provides a quantitative
method for comparing plant function between sites and
geographic locations where equivalent ecological roles are
performed by taxonomically distinct actors, for example
L. divaricata, Cuphea ericoides (C:S:R = 0:100:0%; S) or
Sebastiania ditassoides (1:99:0%; S).
As a further example of the wide applicability of the
method beyond herbaceous vegetation, a range of CSR
strategies was evident in tropical and subtropical forest
biomes, but strategies were particularly clustered around
the CS region as predicted (Fig. 5). Furthermore, a trade-
oﬀwas apparent between CS- and R-selection that was
correlated with environmental gradients: CS-selection was
associated with relatively stable situations (i.e. with less
temperature seasonality) that were warmer and wetter,
with greater annual precipitation and potential evapo-
Fig. 4. An example of local application of the globally calibrated CSR analysis tool ‘StrateFy’ to species characteristic of phytosociologi-
cal syntaxa undergoing primary succession following a trajectory from highly disturbed alpine scree slopes (Thlasietea rotundifolii Br.-Bl.
et al. 1947) to siliceous grassland climax vegetation (Caricion curvulae Br.-Bl. 1925) further modiﬁed by cattle grazing to become alpine
pasture (Nardion strictae Br.-Bl. in Br.Bl. & Jenny 1926). Panel (a) shows separate plant communities recognized by classical phytosociol-
ogy as phases in the succession sequence, and (b) a summary of the phytosociological ‘evolution’ of the vegetation represented as a trajec-
tory in CSR space. Species data represent the mean of 10 replicate measurements for characteristic species of each syntaxon measured in
the central Italian Alps.
© 2016 The Authors. Functional Ecology © 2016 British Ecological Society, Functional Ecology, 31, 444–457
452
S. Pierce et al.
 13652435, 2017, 2, Downloaded from https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1365-2435.12722, Wiley Online Library on [07/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Fig. 5. Total (grey ﬁlled circles) and median (black ﬁlled circles) CSR strategies for 14 principal biomes world-wide (as deﬁned by Olson
et al. 2001). For each biome, median CSR category and sample size (number of species) are shown between parentheses. The distribution
of each biome in the world map is denoted by black areas.
© 2016 The Authors. Functional Ecology © 2016 British Ecological Society, Functional Ecology, 31, 444–457
Global plant CSR analysis
453
 13652435, 2017, 2, Downloaded from https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1365-2435.12722, Wiley Online Library on [07/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

transpiration. Pioneer species in tropical forests were
found to be relatively C-selected, such as Neotropical
Cecropia longipes (C), Ficus insipida (C/CS) and Urera bac-
cifera (C/CR; Appendix Table S1). Indeed, although dis-
turbances and ruderal species are present in tropical
forests, disturbance is not a prevalent factor in the same
way that regular grazing or cutting determines the general
character of pastures or meadows. Instabilities such as gap
formation in tropical forests are local events that do not
shape the forest in its entirety. Gap formation in particular
is characterized by a pulse of light availability, and the
ensuing competition apparently favours C-selection with
succession proceeding relatively uninterrupted towards a
closed tree canopy. Canopy tree species in tropical moist
forest were shown to exhibit a stress tolerance component
(e.g. Brosimum alicastrum, CS; Platypodium elegans, CS/
CSR; Prioria copaifera, CS). This perhaps reﬂects local
sequestration of resources in long-lived tissues in later suc-
cessional stages (Grime 2001), or increasing adaptation to
drought tolerance (Engelbrecht et al. 2007; Baltzer et al.
Fig. 6. Global-scale fourth-corner analysis
(coloured grids) and RLQ analysis (white
dot charts) of the relationship between
CSR strategies and environmental variables
within biomes: (a) tropical moist broadleaf
forests; (b) tropical dry broadleaf forests;
(c) tropical coniferous forests; (d) temper-
ate broadleaf and mixed forests; (e) temper-
ate coniferous forests; (f) boreal forests/
taiga; (g) tropical grasslands, savannas and
shrublands;
(h)
temperate
grasslands,
savannas
and
shrublands;
(i)
montane
grasslands and shrublands; (j) tundra; (k)
Mediterranean
forests
and
scrub;
(l)
deserts/xeric shrublands. TS = temperature
seasonality; AMT = annual mean tempera-
ture;
PS = precipitation
seasonality;
AP = annual precipitation; PET = global
potential evapo-transpiration). Fourth-cor-
ner statistic: red = positive, blue = nega-
tive,
grey = not
signiﬁcant,
*P < 005;
**P < 001; ***P < 0001 (n = number of
species,
P = signiﬁcance
for
the
overall
association between C-, S- and R-selection
and environmental variables).
© 2016 The Authors. Functional Ecology © 2016 British Ecological Society, Functional Ecology, 31, 444–457
454
S. Pierce et al.
 13652435, 2017, 2, Downloaded from https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1365-2435.12722, Wiley Online Library on [07/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

2008). R-selected tropical rain forest species were evident
and potentially occupy speciﬁc microsites at ﬁne scales.
The high diversity of tropical forests may also partly be
related to speciﬁc, single traits operating during the life
cycle, such as ﬂowering and fruiting characters and sym-
bioses (Grime & Pierce 2012). The many and varied mech-
anisms
proposed
to
explain
higher
diversity
at
low
latitudes (discussed by Gaston 2000) probably apply as
much to functional diversity as they do to taxonomic
diversity, with geographic area and environmental stability
(both seasonal and historical) being amongst the most evi-
dent factors aﬀecting the creation of species richness.
Globally, the variation in strategies within biomes is
likely to be inﬂuenced by the presence of contrasting
growth forms. Forbs exhibited extremely broad strategy
diversity and a generalist median strategy of R/CSR, while
trees ranged from C to S, with a CS median strategy simi-
lar to the CS/CSR median strategies evident in tropical
forests (Fig. S3). The presence or absence of particular
strategies at a given location is also likely to be aﬀected by
historical and phylogenetic constraints, with restriction of
CSR strategies evident in some families but not others
(Fig. S4).
The ‘strategy of a species’ as presented here is an average
calculated from individuals of each species sampled at a
particular location. Ecotypic variation throughout the
home range of a species and phenotypic plasticity could
potentially broaden the range of strategy variation for a
given species and is a complicating factor when CSR strate-
gies measured at one site are assumed to be relevant to
other situations. Thus, consideration of the CSR strategy of
a species across a biome world-wide, as in the present study,
should be interpreted with caution and should be seen as a
summary or abstract for the species in lieu of trait data for
all populations throughout the geographic range: this is the
best that can be managed with current global data sets.
Future detailed study of the functional diﬀerences between
biomes should ideally involve replicated surveys within a
range of habitat types and would be a massive undertaking
involving a great deal of international cooperation and
funds. Indeed, the biome-level analysis presented here was
limited by the lack of available data regarding the relative
abundance of species within biomes at the global scale and
could not diﬀerentiate between prevalent and rare strate-
gies. Thus, median CSR strategies for each biome were not
weighted and rare species will have had a disproportionally
strong inﬂuence on the median strategy. Indeed, median
strategies for biomes were generally located towards the
centre of the triangle (Fig. 5).
Nonetheless, just as species richness and taxonomic
identities are fundamental aspects of plant diversity, ‘strat-
egy richness’ and the character of the strategies present are
important aspects of ecological diversity that can now
easily be quantiﬁed and compared. In local-scale studies in
which relative abundance has been quantiﬁed, diﬀering
degrees of dominance between CSR strategies are evident.
For example, microsite diﬀerences and niche partitioning
between contrasting CSR strategies have been invoked as
a mechanism of coexistence and local biodiversity creation
on Brazilian coastal Atlantic forest inselbergs (de Paula
et al. 2015). Similarly, xeric sand calcareous grasslands in
Europe include a mixture of relatively abundant stress-tol-
erator graminoids and larger numbers of infrequent rud-
eral or competitive-ruderal herbs, and CSR strategies are
thus markedly diﬀerent between dominant and subordi-
nate plants at the centimetre scale (Pierce et al. 2014b).
Future application of CSR analysis in further bio-geogra-
phical and ecological contexts world-wide will allow gen-
eral conclusions with regard to how the equilibrium
between dominant and subordinate species may change in
response to environmental perturbation and with regard to
the precise relationships between microsite factors and par-
ticular plant species.
In conclusion, the CSR analysis tool derived from
116 979 records of leaf size and economics traits measured
from 3068 species growing in nature world-wide has
allowed a preliminary CSR analysis of major biome classes
globally. The C, S and R values were in agreement with
phytosociological observations of vegetation responses to
an environmental gradient along a primary succession.
Thus, the global system is consistent with earlier locally
calibrated methods and studies of plant strategies and can
provide a functional explanation consistent with descrip-
tive phytosociological methods of interpreting vegetation.
A uniﬁed framework now exists for ecological strategy
classiﬁcation, using readily determined leaf traits of plants
as diverse as temperate ferns, lianas and tropical trees. The
global strategy–environment relationships that the method
can resolve will form a baseline for predicting which kinds
of species can be expected to assemble where in response
to environmental perturbation resulting from factors such
as climatic or land-use changes.
Acknowledgements
The study has been supported by the TRY initiative on plant traits
(www.try-db.org). The TRY initiative and data base is hosted, developed
and maintained by J.K. and G. B€onisch (Max-Planck-Institute for Biogeo-
chemistry, Jena, Germany). TRY is/has been supported by DIVERSITAS,
IGBP, the Global Land Project, the UK Natural Environment Research
Council (NERC) through its program QUEST (Quantifying and Under-
standing the Earth System), the French Foundation for Biodiversity
Research (FRB), and GIS ‘Climat, Environnement et Societe’ France. We
thank Daniel Laughlin, Frederique Louault, Belinda Medlyn, Julie Messier,
Juli Pausas and Ian Wright for contributing data. The authors declare no
conﬂict of interest.
Data accessibility
All data are archived and are available from the TRY plant trait data base:
www.try-db.org.
References
Baltzer, J.L., Davies, S.J., Bunyavejchewin, S. & Noor, N.S.M. (2008) The
role of desiccation tolerance in determining tree species distributions
along the Malay-Thai Peninsula. Functional Ecology, 22, 221–231.
© 2016 The Authors. Functional Ecology © 2016 British Ecological Society, Functional Ecology, 31, 444–457
Global plant CSR analysis
455
 13652435, 2017, 2, Downloaded from https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1365-2435.12722, Wiley Online Library on [07/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

van Bodegom, P.M., Douma, J.C., Witte, J.P.M., Ordo~nez, J.C., Bartholo-
meus, R.P. & Aerts, R. (2012) Going beyond the limitations of plant
functional types when predicting global ecosystem-atmosphere ﬂuxes:
exploring the merits of traits-based approaches. Global Ecology and Bio-
geography, 21, 625–636.
Braun-Blanquet, J. (1925) Zur wertung der gesellschaftstreue in der
pﬂanzensoziologie. Vierteljahrsschrift der Naturforschenden Gesellschaft
in Z€urich, 70, 122–149.
Bunce, R.G.H., Smart, S.M., devan Poll, H.M., Watkins, J.W. & Scott,
W.A. (1999) ECOFACT 2 - Measuring Change in British vegetation.
Institute of Terrestrial Ecology Monks Wood, Huntingdon, UK.
Caccianiga, M., Luzzaro, A., Pierce, S., Ceriani, R.M. & Cerabolini, B.
(2006) The functional basis of a primary succession resolved by CSR
classiﬁcation. Oikos, 112, 10–20.
Cerabolini, B.E.L., Brusa, G., Ceriani, R.M., De Andreis, R., Luzzaro, A.
& Pierce, S. (2010) Can CSR classiﬁcation be generally applied outside
Britain? Plant Ecology, 210, 253–261.
Cerabolini, B.E.L., Pierce, S., Verginella, A., Brusa, G., Ceriana, R.M. &
Armiraglio, S. (2016) Why are many anthropogenic agroecosystems par-
ticularly species rich? Plant Biosystems, 150, 550–557.
Chesson, P., Gebauer, R.L.E., Schwinning, S., Huntly, N., Wiegand, K., Ern-
est, S.K. et al. (2004) Resource pulses, species interactions, and diversity
maintenance in arid and semi-arid environments. Oecologia, 141, 236–253.
Cornelissen, J.H.C. & Cornwell, W.K. (2014) The Tree of Life in ecosys-
tems: evolution of plant eﬀects on carbon and nutrient cycling. Journal
of Ecology, 102, 269–274.
Cornwell, W.K., Cornelissen, J.H.C., Amatangelo, K., Dorrepaal, E., Evi-
ner, V.T., Godoy, O. et al. (2008) Plant species traits are the predomi-
nant control on litter decomposition rates within biomes worldwide.
Ecology Letters, 11, 1065–1071.
Cornwell, W.K., Westoby, M., Falster, D.S., FitzJohn, R.G., O’Meara,
B.C., Pennell, M.W. et al. (2014) Functional distinctiveness of major
plant lineages. Journal of Ecology, 102, 345–356.
Dıaz, S., Kattge, J., Cornelissen, J.H.C., Wright, I.J., Lavorel, S., Dray, S.
et al. (2016) The global spectrum of plant form and function. Nature,
529, 167–171.
Dray, S., Chessel, D. & Thioulouse, J. (2003) Co-inertia analysis and the
linking of ecological data tables. Ecology, 84, 3078–3089.
Dray, S. & Dufour, A.B. (2007) The ade4 package: implementing the dual-
ity diagram for ecologists. Journal of Statistical Software, 22, 1–20.
Dray, S., Choler, P., Doledec, S., Peres-Neto, P.R., Thuiller, W., Pavoine,
S. et al. (2014) Combining the fourth-corner and the RLQ methods for
assessing trait responses to environmental variation. Ecology, 95, 14–21.
Engelbrecht, B.M.J., Comita, L.S., Condit, R., Kursar, T.A., Tyree, M.T.,
Turner, B.L. et al. (2007) Drought sensitivity shapes species distribution
patterns in tropical forests. Nature, 447, 80–82.
Flores, O., Garnier, E., Wright, I.J., Reich, P.B., Pierce, S., Dıaz, S. et al.
(2014) An evolutionary perspective on leaf economics in vascular plants:
phylogenetic patterns in LMA. Ecology and Evolution, 4, 2799–2811.
Gaston, K.J. (2000) Global patterns in biodiversity. Nature, 405, 220–227.
Gennai, M., Foggi, B., Viciani, D., Carbognani, M. & Tomaselli, M. (2014)
The Nardus-rich communities in the Northern Apennines (N-Italy): a
phytosociological,
ecological
and
phytogeographical
study.
Phyto-
coenologia, 44, 55–80.
Grime, J.P. (1974) Vegetation classiﬁcation by reference to strategies. Nat-
ure, 250, 26–31.
Grime, J.P. (1977) Evidence for the existence of three primary strategies in
plants and its relevance to ecological and evolutionary theory. American
Naturalist, 111, 1169–1194.
Grime, J.P. (2001) Plant Strategies, Vegetation Processes and Ecosystem
Properties, Second edn. Wiley, Chichester, UK.
Grime, J.P., Hodgson, J.G. & Hunt, R. (1988) Comparative Plant Ecology: A
Functional Approach to Common British Species. Unwin Hyman, London,
UK.
Grime, J.P. & Pierce, S. (2012) The Evolutionary Strategies that Shape
Ecosystems. Wiley-Blackwell, Chichester, UK.
Grime, J.P., Thompson, K., Hunt, R., Hodgson, J.G., Cornelissen, J.H.C.,
Rorison, I.H. et al. (1997) Integrated screening validates primary axes of
specialisation in plants. Oikos, 79, 259–281.
Hijmans, R.J., Cameron, S.E., Parra, J.L., Jones, P.G. & Jarvis, A. (2005)
Very high resolution interpolated climate surfaces for global land areas.
International Journal of Climatology, 25, 1965–1978.
Hodgson, J.G., Wilson, P.J., Hunt, R., Grime, J.P. & Thompson, K. (1999)
Allocating CSR plant functional types: a soft approach to a hard prob-
lem. Oikos, 85, 282–294.
Hunt, R., Hodgson, J.G., Thompson, K., Bungener, P., Dunnett, N.P. &
Askew, A.P. (2004) A new practical tool for deriving a functional signa-
ture for herbaceous vegetation. Applied Vegetation Science, 7, 163–170.
Kattge, J., Dıaz, S., Lavorel, S., Prentice, I.C., Leadley, P., B€onisch, G.
et al. (2011) TRY – a global database of plant traits. Global Change
Biology, 17, 2905–2935.
Kleyer, M., Bekker, R.M., Knevel, I.C., Bakker, J.P., Thompson, K., Son-
nenschein, M. et al. (2008) The LEDA Traitbase: a database of life-history
traits of the Northwest European ﬂora. Journal of Ecology, 96, 1266–1274.
Kreft, H. & Jetz, W. (2007) Global patterns and determinants of vascular
plant diversity. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America, 104, 5925–5930.
Leps, J., Osbornova-Kosinova, J. & Rejmanek, M. (1982) Community sta-
bility, complexity and species life history strategies. Vegetation, 50, 53–
63.
Negreiros, D., Le Stradic, S., Fernandes, G.W. & Renno, H.C. (2014) CSR
analysis of plant functional types in highly diverse tropical grasslands of
harsh environments. Plant Ecology, 215, 379–388.
Olson, D.M., Dinerstein, E., Wikramanayake, E.D., Burgess, N.D., Powell,
G.V.N., Underwood, E.C. et al. (2001) Terrestrial ecoregions of the
world: a new map of life on Earth. BioScience, 51, 933–938.
de Paula, L.F.A., Negreiros, D., Azevedo, L.O., Fernandes, R.L., Steh-
mann, J.R. & Silveira, F.A.O. (2015) Functional ecology as a missing
link for conservation of a resource-limited ﬂora in the Atlantic Forest.
Biodiversity and Conservation, 24, 2239–2253.
Pierce, S., Luzzaro, A., Caccianiga, M., Ceriani, R.M. & Cerabolini, B.
(2007a) Disturbance is the principal a-scale ﬁlter determining niche dif-
ferentiation, coexistence and biodiversity in an alpine community. Jour-
nal of Ecology, 95, 698–706.
Pierce, S., Ceriani, R.M., De Andreis, R., Luzzaro, A. & Cerabolini, B.
(2007b) The leaf economics spectrum of Poaceae reﬂects variation in sur-
vival strategies. Plant Biosystems, 141, 337–343.
Pierce, S., Brusa, G., Sartori, M. & Cerabolini, B.E.L. (2012) Combined
use of leaf size and economics traits allows direct comparison of hydro-
phyte and terrestrial herbaceous adaptive strategies. Annals of Botany,
109, 1047–1053.
Pierce, S., Brusa, G., Vagge, I. & Cerabolini, B.E.L. (2013) Allocating CSR
plant functional types: the use of leaf economics and size traits to classify
woody and herbaceous vascular plants. Functional Ecology, 27, 1002–1010.
Pierce, S., Bottinelli, A., Bassani, I., Ceriani, R.M. & Cerabolini, B.E.L.
(2014a) How well do seed production traits correlate with leaf traits,
whole plant traits and plant ecological strategies? Plant Ecology, 215,
1351–1359.
Pierce, S., Vagge, I., Brusa, G. & Cerabolini, B.E.L. (2014b) The intimacy
between sexual traits and Grime’s CSR strategies for orchids coexisting
in semi-natural calcareous grassland at the Olive Lawn. Plant Ecology,
215, 495–505.
Podani, J. (2007) Analisi ed Esplorazione Multivariata dei Dati in Ecologia e
Biologia. Liguori Editori, Napoli, Italy (in the Italian language).
R Development Core Team (2013) R: A Language and Environment for Sta-
tistical Computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna.
http://www.r-project.org [accessed 2 November 2013]
Reich, P.B. (2014) The world-wide ‘fast-slow’ plant economics spectrum: a
traits manifesto. Journal of Ecology, 102, 275–301.
Santiago, L.S. & Wright, S.J. (2007) Leaf functional traits of tropical forest
plants in relation to growth form. Functional Ecology, 21, 19–27.
Schmidtlein, S., Feilhauer, H. & Bruelheide, H. (2012) Mapping plant strat-
egy types using remote sensing. Journal of Vegetation Science, 23, 395–
405.
Soudzilovskaia, N.A., Elumeeva, T.G., Onipchenko, V.G., Shidakov, I.I.,
Salpagarova, F.S., Khubiev, A.B. et al. (2013) Functional traits predict
relationship between plant abundance dynamic and long-term climate
warming. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America, 110, 18180–18184.
Tomaselli, M. (1997) Ecogeograﬁcal gradients in Salix herbacea vegetation
of the Alps. Actes du Colloque Ecologie et Biogeographie Alpines. La
Thuile 2-6 Septembre 1990. Suppl. Rev. Vald. d’Hist. Nat., 48, 1994. pp.
335–346.
Tomaselli, M. & Rossi, G. (1994) Phytosociology and ecology of Caricion
curvulae vegetation in the northern Apennines (N Italy). Fitosociologia,
26, 51–62.
Trabucco, A. & Zomer, R.J. (2009) Global Aridity Index (Global-Aridity)
and Global Potential EvapoTranspiration (Global-PET) geospatial data-
base. CGIAR Consortium for Spatial Information. http://www.cgiar-
csi.org/ [accessed 14 October 2014].
© 2016 The Authors. Functional Ecology © 2016 British Ecological Society, Functional Ecology, 31, 444–457
456
S. Pierce et al.
 13652435, 2017, 2, Downloaded from https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1365-2435.12722, Wiley Online Library on [07/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Verheijen, L.M., Aerts, R., B€onisch, G., Kattge, J. & Van Bodegom, P.M.
(2016) Variation in trait trade-oﬀs allows diﬀerentiation among prede-
ﬁned plant functional types: implications for predictive ecology. New
Phytologist, 209, 563–575.
Warton, D.I. & Hui, F.K.C. (2011) The arcsine is asinine: the analysis of
proportions in ecology. Ecology, 92, 3–10.
Wright, I.J., Reich, P.B., Westoby, M., Ackerly, D.D., Baruch, Z., Bongers,
F. et al. (2004) The worldwide leaf economics spectrum. Nature, 428,
821–827.
Received 14 September 2015; accepted 23 July 2016
Handling Editor: Jennifer Baltzer
Supporting Information
Additional Supporting Information may be found online in the
supporting information tab for this article:
Fig. S1. Regressions between transformed values of a) leaf area
(LA), b) leaf dry matter content (LDMC), and c) speciﬁc leaf area
(SLA) and PCA axis scores for 3068 tracheophyte species from
across the world.
Fig. S2. Regressions between the degree of C-, S- and R-selection
(panels
a,
b,
and
c,
respectively)
as
determined
by
the
globally-calibrated method (x-axis) and the CSR analysis method
of Pierce et al. (2013) calibrated using the Flora of Italy (y-axis).
Fig. S3. CSR strategies of growth habit categories for 3068 species
from across the world, calculated using the globally-calibrated
CSR analysis tool ‘StrateFy’.
Fig. S4. CSR strategies for major ﬂowering plant families (i.e.
those most highly represented in the database; minimum 30 spe-
cies), calculated using the globally-calibrated CSR analysis tool
‘StrateFy’.
Table S1. Species list including authorities, life forms, biome infor-
mation and CSR strategies.
Table S2. ‘StrateFy’, the global vascular plant CSR calculator tool
in Microsoft Excel format.
© 2016 The Authors. Functional Ecology © 2016 British Ecological Society, Functional Ecology, 31, 444–457
Global plant CSR analysis
457
 13652435, 2017, 2, Downloaded from https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1365-2435.12722, Wiley Online Library on [07/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
