See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/348593201
FungalTraits: a user-friendly traits database of fungi and fungus-like
stramenopiles
Article  in  Fungal Diversity · November 2020
DOI: 10.1007/s13225-020-00466-2
CITATIONS
880
READS
7,093
128 authors, including:
Kessy Abarenkov
University of Tartu
116 PUBLICATIONS   26,240 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Rolf Henrik Nilsson
University of Gothenburg
293 PUBLICATIONS   41,825 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Björn D. Lindahl
Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences
362 PUBLICATIONS   21,015 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Karina Clemmensen
Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences
88 PUBLICATIONS   9,025 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by József Geml on 19 January 2021.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

Vol.:(0123456789)
1 3
Fungal Diversity 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13225-020-00466-2
FungalTraits: a user‑friendly traits database of fungi and fungus‑like 
stramenopiles
Sergei Põlme1,2   · Kessy Abarenkov2 · R. Henrik Nilsson3,4 · Björn D. Lindahl5 · Karina Engelbrecht Clemmensen6 · 
Havard Kauserud7 · Nhu Nguyen8 · Rasmus Kjøller9 · Scott T. Bates10 · Petr Baldrian11 · Tobias Guldberg Frøslev12 · 
Kristjan Adojaan1 · Alfredo Vizzini13 · Ave Suija1 · Donald Pfister14 · Hans‑Otto Baral15 · Helle Järv16 · 
Hugo Madrid17,18 · Jenni Nordén19 · Jian‑Kui Liu20 · Julia Pawlowska21 · Kadri Põldmaa1 · Kadri Pärtel1 · 
Kadri Runnel1 · Karen Hansen22 · Karl‑Henrik Larsson3,23 · Kevin David Hyde24 · Marcelo Sandoval‑Denis25 · 
Matthew E. Smith26 · Merje Toome‑Heller27 · Nalin N. Wijayawardene28 · Nelson Menolli Jr.29,30 · 
Nicole K. Reynolds26 · Rein Drenkhan31 · Sajeewa S. N. Maharachchikumbura20 · Tatiana B. Gibertoni32 · 
Thomas Læssøe33 · William Davis34 · Yuri Tokarev35 · Adriana Corrales36 · Adriene Mayra Soares37 · Ahto Agan1 · 
Alexandre Reis Machado32 · Andrés Argüelles‑Moyao38 · Andrew Detheridge39 · Angelina de Meiras‑Ottoni32 · 
Annemieke Verbeken40 · Arun Kumar Dutta41 · Bao‑Kai Cui42 · C. K. Pradeep43 · César Marín44,45 · Daniel Stanton46 · 
Daniyal Gohar1 · Dhanushka N. Wanasinghe47 · Eveli Otsing1 · Farzad Aslani1 · Gareth W. Griffith39 · 
Thorsten H. Lumbsch48 · Hans‑Peter Grossart49,50 · Hossein Masigol51 · Ina Timling52 · Inga Hiiesalu1 · Jane Oja1 · 
John Y. Kupagme1 · József Geml53 · Julieta Alvarez‑Manjarrez38 · Kai Ilves1 · Kaire Loit54 · Kalev Adamson31 · 
Kazuhide Nara55 · Kati Küngas1 · Keilor Rojas‑Jimenez56 · Krišs Bitenieks57 · Laszlo Irinyi58,59 · László Laszlo Nagy60 · 
Liina Soonvald54 · Li‑Wei Zhou61 · Lysett Wagner62 · M. Catherine Aime63 · Maarja Öpik1 · María Isabel Mujica64 · 
Martin Metsoja1 · Martin Ryberg65 · Martti Vasar1 · Masao Murata55 · Matthew P. Nelsen48 · Michelle Cleary66 · 
Milan C. Samarakoon24 · Mingkwan Doilom47 · Mohammad Bahram1,67 · Niloufar Hagh‑Doust1 · 
Olesya Dulya1,68 · Peter Johnston69 · Petr Kohout11 · Qian Chen61 · Qing Tian24 · Rajasree Nandi70 · 
Rasekh Amiri1 · Rekhani Hansika Perera24 · Renata dos Santos Chikowski32 · Renato L. Mendes‑Alvarenga32 · 
Roberto Garibay‑Orijel38 · Robin Gielen1 · Rungtiwa Phookamsak47 · Ruvishika S. Jayawardena24 · Saleh Rahimlou1 · 
Samantha C. Karunarathna47 · Saowaluck Tibpromma47 · Shawn P. Brown71 · Siim‑Kaarel Sepp1 · Sunil Mundra7,72 · 
Zhu‑Hua Luo73 · Tanay Bose74 · Tanel Vahter1 · Tarquin Netherway67 · Teng Yang75 · Tom May76 · Torda Varga60 · 
Wei Li77 · Victor Rafael Matos Coimbra32 · Virton Rodrigo Targino de Oliveira32 · Vitor Xavier de Lima32 · 
Vladimir S. Mikryukov1 · Yongzhong Lu78 · Yosuke Matsuda79 · Yumiko Miyamoto80 · Urmas Kõljalg1,2 · 
Leho Tedersoo1,2
Received: 14 August 2020 / Accepted: 2 December 2020 
© MUSHROOM RESEARCH FOUNDATION 2021
Abstract
The cryptic lifestyle of most fungi necessitates molecular identification of the guild in environmental studies. Over the past 
decades, rapid development and affordability of molecular tools have tremendously improved insights of the fungal diversity 
in all ecosystems and habitats. Yet, in spite of the progress of molecular methods, knowledge about functional properties of 
the fungal taxa is vague and interpretation of environmental studies in an ecologically meaningful manner remains challeng-
ing. In order to facilitate functional assignments and ecological interpretation of environmental studies we introduce a user 
friendly traits and character database FungalTraits operating at genus and species hypothesis levels. Combining the infor-
mation from previous efforts such as FUNGuild and ­FunFun together with involvement of expert knowledge, we reannotated 
10,210 and 151 fungal and Stramenopila genera, respectively. This resulted in a stand-alone spreadsheet dataset covering 17 
lifestyle related traits of fungal and Stramenopila genera, designed for rapid functional assignments of environmental studies. 
Supplementary Information  The online version of this article 
(https​://doi.org/10.1007/s1322​5-020-00466​-2) contains 
supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
Extended author information available on the last page of the article

	
Fungal Diversity
1 3
In order to assign the trait states to fungal species hypotheses, the scientific community of experts manually categorised 
and assigned available trait information to 697,413 fungal ITS sequences. On the basis of those sequences we were able to 
summarise trait and host information into 92,623 fungal species hypotheses at 1% dissimilarity threshold.
Keywords  Fungal traits · Trophic modes · Function · Guild · Bioinformatics · High-throughput sequencing · Community 
ecology
Introduction
Fungi are one of the most diverse groups of organisms on 
Earth both in terms of taxonomic richness and functional 
diversity (McLaughlin and Spatafora 2014; Hawksworth 
and Lücking 2017). Certain guilds of fungi deliver essential 
ecosystem functions or colonise habitats too harsh for most 
other organisms (Mueller et al. 2005; Peay et al. 2016). In 
particular, lichenised fungi associate with algae or cyano-
bacteria for energy sources to enable colonisation of inhos-
pitable dry, saline, cold or hot habitats such as nutrient-poor 
polar and desert soils. Fungal saprotrophs are the most effi-
cient decomposers of dead plant material in soil, water, and 
sediments (McLaughlin and Spatafora 2014; Grossart et al. 
2019). Mycorrhizal fungi promote plant health and nutrition 
by providing water and nutrients from soil and protection 
against pathogens, herbivores, and several abiotic stresses 
(Smith and Read 2008). Besides these unique functions, cer-
tain fungi and fungus-like stramenopile groups (Oomycota, 
Hyphochytriomycota and Labyrinthulida, syn. Labyrinthu-
lomycota) may inhabit plant tissues as endophytes (asymp-
tomatic, commensal or weakly mutualistic inhabitants) and 
pathogens. Fungal and oomycete pathogens are among the 
most harmful pests in forestry and agriculture (Hyde et al. 
2018; Lucas 2020), whereas oomycetes, labyrinthulids and 
unicellular fungi of the Aphelidiomycota, Chytridiomycota 
and Rozellomycota may be the most common parasites 
of microfauna, protozoans and algae in aquatic habitats 
(Archibald et al. 2017; Grossart et al. 2019). Fungi are also 
important agents of disease in animals including humans—
especially in immunocompromised patients (Brown et al. 
2012; de Hoog et al. 2018; Hyde et al. 2018). Although bac-
teria and viruses are relatively more important parasites of 
animals (Ryan et al. 2019), chytrids and soil fungi cause the 
most devastating diseases in amphibians and bats, respec-
tively (Fisher et al. 2012). Because of their capacity to pro-
duce antibiotics, toxins and various secondary metabolites, 
fungi have incredible biotechnological potential, including 
biocontrol of plant diseases, pests and weeds and stimulation 
of plant growth (Pavlova and Sokornova 2018; Hyde et al. 
2019; Levchenko et al. 2020; Meyer et al. 2020).
Due to the mostly cryptic lifestyles of fungi, molecular 
methods—especially DNA sequence analysis—have been 
increasingly used for fungal identification. In the last decade, 
Sanger-sequencing of amplicons from a single organism has 
been supplemented by high-throughput sequencing (HTS) 
methods that enable sequencing of millions of DNA mol-
ecules from multiple samples in parallel. This has resulted in 
unprecedented insights into fungal diversity and taxonomic 
composition in all types of complex environments, including 
soil, water, living plant tissues and dust (Nilsson et al. 2018; 
Větrovský et al. 2020). Curated sequence databases such 
as UNITE (Nilsson et al. 2019) and ISHAM (Irinyi et al. 
2015) have greatly improved our ability to classify fungal 
operational taxonomic units (OTUs) into species, genera, or 
higher-level taxa. These OTUs can be compared across sam-
ples, studies, and time using the Species Hypothesis (SH) 
approach, in which species-level proxies are linked to digital 
object identifiers (DOIs; Kõljalg et al. 2013, 2016).
Thus far, we have limited knowledge about functional 
properties of most fungi and our insights into their ecol-
ogy and functions are mainly derived from observational 
(correlative) field studies. Although most fungi are not 
easily culturable (Hawksworth 1991), detailed experi-
mental studies are needed to obtain deeper insight into 
their functions and autecology. Nonetheless, habitat prop-
erties provide initial cues about the potential lifestyle of 
fungal species, especially when isolated from biotrophic 
structures such as leaf spots or mycorrhizas. However, 
the trophic mode of many species can be highly variable, 
including switches between mutualistic, pathogenic and 
saprotrophic strategies. For example, pathogenic taxa that 
cause leaf spots may begin as endophytes, but because of 
environmental stress they become pathogenic and eventu-
ally saprotrophs after the death of plant tissues (Prom-
puttha et al. 2005, 2007). The necrotrophic Rhizoctonia 
species (Ceratobasidiaceae) may be pathogens of some 
plant species, endophytes in others and then also form 
orchid mycorrhizal symbiosis with Orchidaceae (Veldre 
et al. 2013). In contrast, the detection of mycorrhizal fungi 
in clinical samples such as mucosal swabs from patients 
is suggestive of air-borne propagules or laboratory con-
tamination (Ghannoum et al. 2010). Accordingly, HTS-
based taxonomic inventories of fungi provide limited 
evidence for the functional roles of community members 
(Nilsson et al. 2018). To overcome these issues, the first 
panfungal databases linking taxa to lifestyles were pub-
lished several years ago (Tedersoo et al. 2014; Nguyen 
et al. 2016), although other, more specific traits databases 
were already available for, e.g., ectomycorrhizal functional 

Fungal Diversity	
1 3
traits (DEEMY; Rambold and Agerer 1997), morphologi-
cal and chemical traits of lichens (LIAS; Triebel et al. 
2007), fruitbody C and N isotope content (Mayor et al. 
2009) and fungal sterols (Weete et al. 2010).
Most functional traits of fungi are conserved at the 
genus-level and sometimes higher taxonomic ranks; there-
fore, accurate species- or genus-level identification may be 
used to infer functional traits of taxa (Tedersoo et al. 2014; 
Nguyen et al. 2016; Zanne et al. 2020). Fungal guilds and 
taxonomic groups may differ substantially in patterns of 
biogeography, community assembly, and host specificity 
(Tedersoo et al. 2014; Davison et al. 2015; Tisthammer et al. 
2016; Põlme et al. 2018). It is also important to separate 
fungal taxa into guilds or other narrow functional groups for 
evaluation of associated ecosystem services (Banerjee et al. 
2018; Soonvald et al. 2019; Tedersoo et al. 2020). With an 
increasing number of environmental studies, a large propor-
tion of sequences deposited in repositories are tagged as 
‘unidentified fungi’ or ‘uncultured organisms’. These uncer-
tainties, misidentifications and historical synonyms impede 
proper taxonomic and functional assignments of taxa in HTS 
studies. Accurate taxonomic assignments in reference data 
improve taxonomic interpretation and potentially related 
functional assignments in environmental studies (Nilsson 
et al. 2019).
At present, five databases are available for inference of 
functional guilds and trait information for taxa across most 
fungal phyla. Tedersoo et al. (2014) published a spreadsheet 
dataset of fungal guilds and cell types (yeast vs. dimorphic 
vs. filamentous) based on genus- and family-level informa-
tion. These data were supplemented and in many places 
corrected for errors in the FUNGuild database (Nguyen 
et al. 2016) with assessments of reliability and an important 
option to allow taxa to be part of multiple guilds simultane-
ously. FUNGuild also incorporated R and python scripts for 
automatic assignment of functional guilds to the taxonomic 
output of HTS bioinformatics platforms. Independently, 
Jayasiri et al. (2015) presented the FacesOfFungi database 
that encompasses descriptions of species and genera of 
mainly Ascomycota. These descriptions include diagnosis 
as well as ecological, biochemical and economic charac-
terisation, sometimes supplemented with photographs, 
drawings, and phylogenies. Based on the FacesOfFungi, 
Guerreiro et al. (2018) developed the ascomycete-specific 
database ‘Notes on genera: Ascomycota’ including habi-
tats, substrates, gross biotic interactions and trophic modes. 
Most recently, Zanne et al. (2020) introduced the ­FunFun 
database that encompasses much of the data in FUNGuild, 
supplemented with information about cellular, ecological, 
and biochemical traits at the species and genus levels. ­FunFun 
was designed to harbor as many biochemical, genetic, and 
morphological traits as possible. Similarly to FUNGuild, 
­FunFun has a script for assignment of functions to taxa.
Here we present the fungal traits and characters database 
FungalTraits, a stand-alone spreadsheet dataset, to serve 
as a resource that provides general ecological information 
and functional assignment for environmental studies. The 
framework of FungalTraits was designed during the North 
European Forest Mycologist (NEFOM) network meeting in 
Riga, 27–28 November 2014, and elaborated further in sub-
sequent, broader meetings. The main objective was to bridge 
DNA sequences to the family- and genus-based traits dataset 
and specimen-related metadata, which have been enabled by 
recent developments in biodiversity informatics. Supported 
by a broad international research community, FungalTraits 
intends to provide comprehensive information about a con-
strained number of ecologically relevant traits for as many 
taxa as possible to facilitate trait-based comparative phylo-
genetics as well as comprehensive analyses in community 
ecology and macroecology. FungalTraits provides a comple-
mentary alternative to existing trait databases, and it seeks 
to exchange data with other traits databases to provide a rich 
platform in which to advance fungal biology.
Materials and methods
Annotations of genera
Starting in September 2012, we systematically compiled 
ecological information for fungal genera. Parts of this infor-
mation related to taxa with a sequenced ITS region were 
published in the reference dataset of Tedersoo et al. (2014) 
and further in FUNGuild. As of 10 January 2019, we com-
piled complete lists of all genera of Fungi and fungus-like 
stramenopiles (the phyla Oomycota, Hyphochytriomycota, 
and Labyrinthulida) from multiple, largely overlapping 
sources: Index Fungorum (www.index​fungo​rum.org), NCBI 
(www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov), Mycobank (www.mycob​ank.
org), and the Outline of Fungi beta version (final version 
in Wijayawardene et al. 2020). We also included numerous 
synonyms and unused names, because many of these may 
be revived in forthcoming taxonomic treatments, or applied 
when sequencing existing collections. Furthermore, there 
was a substantial conflict among these sources regarding 
the validity and synonymy of taxon names. Many research-
ers do not use the accepted names and continue to use taxon 
names synonymised in some of the data sources but not in 
others (e.g., Rhizoctonia instead of Ceratobasidium and 
Thanatephorus, which may have a more specific meaning; 
Oberwinkler et al. 2013).
In total, we retrieved 10,210 fungal and 151 stramenopile 
genera accepted in at least one of the four sources. For the 
higher-level taxonomy of Fungi, we followed the Outline 
of Fungi, which represents a consensus of NCBI, Index 
Fungorum and Tedersoo et al. (2018a) classifications, and 

	
Fungal Diversity
1 3
updated this with recently described taxa or new phyloge-
netic information.
Guild and trait names correspond to the Biological Obser-
vation Matrix (BIOM) standards (McDonald et al. 2012), 
including those proposed in our previous work (Tedersoo 
et al. 2014; Nguyen et al. 2016; Zanne et al. 2020), with 
major modifications made to trait arrangement and character 
(trait) state names (Table 1; Supplementary item 1). To avoid 
excessive lists of character states and minimise uncertainty 
in fungal guild assignments, we separated the guild infor-
mation into separate fields including ‘primary_lifestyle’, 
‘secondary_lifestyle’, ‘plant_pathogenic_capacity’, ‘endo-
phytic_interaction_capacity’, ‘animal_biotrophic_capacity’, 
and ‘decay_substrate’. The most commonly occurring life-
style is given in the ‘primary_lifestyle’ (30 character states). 
One or more additional lifestyles, if relevant, are given in the 
‘secondary_lifestyle’ field. An additional ‘comment_on_life-
style’ field also allows specification of the additional life-
style, which occurs in only one or a few species, sometimes 
referring to a particular species. For fully or partly (facul-
tatively) saprotrophic taxa, we generated the fields ‘decay_
substrate’ and ‘decay_type’, the latter indicating classical 
decay categories e.g. white rot. However, we anticipate that 
in nature there is a continuum in the decomposition strate-
gies and large differences within decay types (Riley et al. 
2014; Floudas et al. 2020). The ‘plant_pathogenic_capacity’ 
field indicates whether plant pathogens occur in this group 
and which plant groups (e.g. angiosperms, algae, mosses, 
and liverworts) or organs (leaves, fruits, seeds, roots, etc.) 
are infected. The ‘endophytic_interaction_capacity’ field 
indicates whether members of the genus are able to grow 
as endophytes, classifying these following Rodriguez et al. 
(2009). The field ‘animal_biotrophic_capacity’ enables 
selection amongst a variety of mutualistic and antagonis-
tic interactions with animals, with further specifications of 
animal groups (arthropod, coral, fish, invertebrate, verte-
brate, termite, and human) and opportunistic interactions 
with humans.
In contrast to other functional databases, we also intro-
duced the trait ‘aquatic_habitat’. This allows categorise 
fungi as marine, freshwater, more broadly aquatic, or partly 
water-inhabiting, because many aquatic taxa are often 
recorded from roots and soil (Chauvet et al. 2016). We find 
this field of high importance for aquatic studies, as it may be 
necessary to distinguish accidental spores of terrestrial fungi 
from taxa that grow naturally inside or on substrates in water 
(Grossart et al. 2019). We anticipate that such categorisation 
is subjective for the time being, because we know very little 
about different life stages of many microfungal genera.
We also introduced the traits ‘fruitbody_type’ and ‘hyme-
nium_type’. The ‘fruitbody_type’ covers virtually all clas-
sically distinguished types of sexual reproductive struc-
tures in Ascomycota, Basidiomycota, and early diverging 
lineages, and indicates the cases where none are produced. 
‘Hymenium_type’ indicates the morphology of hymenium, 
where the sexual propagules are located relative to the rest 
of the fruitbody, if relevant. Traditionally, multiple taxono-
mists and fungal ecologists delimit their research subject by 
fruitbody type (e.g. polypores, corticioids, agarics, truffles, 
disco-fungi), although fruitbody and hymenium types are 
typically not entirely related to other functions. We greatly 
extended the field ‘growth_form’ that enables 15 character 
Table 1   Data fields and 
their properties in genus-
level annotation of traits and 
characters
Numbers in parentheses indicate the number of character states
Data field
Category
Field type
Importance
Primary_lifestyle
Selection (30)
Guild
Primary
Secondary_lifestyle
Selection (30)/text
Guild
Secondary
Comment_on_lifestyle
text
Guild
Secondary
Plant_pathogenic_capacity
Selection (8)
Guild
Primary
Endophytic_interaction_capacity
Selection (7)
Guild
Primary
Animal_biotrophic_capacity
Selection (19)
Guild
Primary
Decay_substrate
Selection (16)
Guild
Primary
Decay_type
Selection (8)
Guild
Secondary
Growth_form
Selection (15)
Body
Primary
Fruitbody_type
Selection (23)
Body
Primary
Hymenium_type
Selection (7)
Body
Secondary
Aquatic_habitat
Selection (7)
Habitat
Primary
Specific_hosts
Text
Habitat
Secondary
Ectomycorrhiza_lineage
Selection (87)
Specific: ectomycorrhiza
Secondary
Ectomycorrhiza_exploration_type
Selection (7)
Specific: ectomycorrhiza
Secondary
Lichen_primary_photobiont
Text
Specific: Lichen
Secondary
Lichen_secondary_photobiont
Text
Specific: Lichen
Secondary

Fungal Diversity	
1 3
states covering amoeboid, filamentous, thalloid, and various 
unicellular forms relevant to fungi and stramenopiles.
We specifically broadened trait information for EcM 
fungi and lichens. For EcM fungi, we introduced the evolu-
tionary character ‘ectomycorrhiza_lineage’ sensu Tedersoo 
and Smith (2017) and ‘ectomycorrhiza_exploration_type’ 
following Tedersoo and Smith (2013). Exploration types 
are defined by the development, form and differentation of 
extraradical mycelium and rhizomorphs that are related to 
nutrient acquisition strategies of EcM fungi (Agerer 2001). 
For exploration types, we used updated information from 
more recently included or described genera. We furthermore 
split the short-distance type to short-distance delicate and 
short-distance coarse, based on the characteristics of ema-
nating hyphae (< 1–5 µm diam., thin-walled and cylindrical 
vs. 3–10 µm diam., thick-walled and plump, respectively). 
Hyphal morphology may indicate the capacity to forage in 
the immediate vicinity of root tips and preliminary analyses 
indicate that these two types respond differently to environ-
mental variables and disturbance (Tedersoo et al. 2020). For 
lichens, we included specific information on the primary 
and secondary photobiont (as primary_photobiont and sec-
ondary_photobiont) obtained from the literature. For non-
lichenised taxa, we included the field ‘specific_hosts’ to 
accommodate information on known exclusive associations 
with certain taxa (genus- to order-level taxa in Latin, higher 
taxa in English).
As a starting point, we incorporated pre-existing traits 
information in Tedersoo et al. (2014) and last versions of 
FUNGuild (accessed 08.10.2018) and ­FunFun (GitHub data-
set; Flores-Moreno et al. 2019; accessed 09.12.2019) into 
FungalTraits. This information was manually parsed into 
relevant traits fields and reformatted according to our stand-
ards to generate a partly filled template. The coauthors with 
expertise in taxonomy and fungal ecology were guided to 
revise the existing information and fill the traits fields with 
pre-selected character states and add comments to the tem-
plate whenever relevant. The character states were initially 
determined by the core group of developers, but several 
character states were added upon consultation with experts 
and during data search and insertion. As opinions varied, 
the terminology represents a compromise among experts. 
Experts annotated taxa based on their long-term experience 
with the particular taxonomic groups, scientific literature 
(e.g., Kurtzman et al. 2011; de Hoog et al. 2018) and spe-
cific databases, including LIAS (online version; Rambold 
et al. 2016), Marine Fungi (Jones et al. 2019) and ‘Notes on 
genera: Ascomycota’. Lists of annotated genera were com-
pared and merged by curators. Nearly half of the genera 
were covered by two experts. In the rare cases of conflicting 
annotations, a third opinion was sought. Initially, roughly 
one-quarter of the genera were covered by no experts (some 
declined immediately or failed to provide information for 
various reasons; for several outlying groups no experts were 
located). Genera belonging to these groups (e.g. Saccharo-
mycotina, Taphrinomycotina, several orders of Sordariomy-
cetes and Leotiomycetes and many small groups) were later 
annotated by a mycologist with no specific expertise, based 
on a thorough literature survey, using searches in Google and 
Google Scholar, the databases FacesOfFungi and Freshwa-
ter Ascomycetes Database (Shearer and Raja 2010) as well 
as comprehensive books (Kurtzman et al. 2011; Pöggeler 
and Wöstemeyer 2011; McLaughlin and Spatafora 2014; 
Archibald et al. 2017). The basis of taxonomic and biologi-
cal knowledge relies on comprehensive work of field tax-
onomists and plant pathologists. Specific literature sources 
were not included as citations to speed up the process and 
avoid dealing with tens of thousands of original references.
Annotation of ITS sequences
To provide trait information to Species Hypotheses, 
we selected an approach to perform bulk annotation of 
sequences (including sequenced individuals) from the 
International Nucleotide Sequence Databases consortium 
(INSDc) as hosted in the UNITE database (version 7.2). 
Character states of sequences were merged to individual 
Species Hypotheses by automated means. Based on the 
BIOM standards (McDonald et al. 2012), we developed mul-
tiple fields for specific traits and character states (Table 2, 
Supplementary item 1). The data fields included ‘DNA_
source’, with related fields ‘culture_source’ and ‘animal/
human_tissue’ for specific cases where sequences were 
obtained directly from pure cultures or animal samples. 
We included the optional fields ‘guild’ and ‘growth_form’ 
for cases where this was unequivocally clear. In a similar 
manner, we generated the fields ‘ectomycorrhiza_explora-
tion_type’, ‘ericoid_mycorrhiza_formation’, ‘endophytic_
interaction_capability’, ‘plant/fungal_pathogenic_capacity’, 
and ‘animal/human_biotrophic_interaction_capacity’. Fill-
ing these fields presumed that there was sufficient obser-
vational or experimental evidence for this indicated in 
the original commentary field or in the article. The fields 
‘interacting_taxon’ and ‘co-occurring_taxon’ respectively 
depict data obtained from specific intimate partners or from 
a habitat strongly modified by one or more (comma sepa-
rated) organisms, for example tree species for soil-inhabiting 
fungi. In both fields, the associated taxon was required to be 
in Latin, at any taxonomic level. Latin taxon names were 
checked against the Encyclopedia of Life (www.eol.org) and 
The Plant List (www.thepl​antli​st.org) for validity and correct 
spelling. Exclusively for cultures and vouchered specimens, 
respectively, we added relevant information to the original 
INSDc data field ‘INSD.original.data.Strain’ or ‘INSD.origi-
nal.data.Specimen.voucher’ that were renamed as ‘strain’ 
and ‘specimen_voucher’ (to meet the BIOM standards 

	
Fungal Diversity
1 3
implemented in UNITE). We also checked whether these 
strains or specimens represented type material and added 
these data to the field ‘Type status (Identification.Typifi-
cation)’ (renamed as ‘type_material’) when relevant. For 
geographic information, we combined the existing INSDc 
data fields into a more standardised format by erecting the 
fields ‘country’ (mandatory; to be selected), ‘state/province’, 
‘locality_text’, ‘latitude’, ‘longitude’, ‘altitude’, ‘depth’, and 
‘biome’ (to be selected). In addition, we included a general 
remarks field to specify, e.g., habitat, taxonomy and host for 
later separation into specific remarks fields related to each 
main field.
In order to assign and summarise trait states of individual 
records to SHs, we downloaded all ITS sequences by studies 
and ranked the studies by the number of sequences included, 
initially focusing only on those with at least 100 sequences. 
Based on titles, we omitted studies that addressed plants 
and animals, but included those that covered all eukaryotes. 
We also excluded studies that produced only ITS1 or ITS2 
sequences using HTS techniques, because these subregions 
separately offer lower taxonomic resolution compared with 
full-length sequences (Garnica et al. 2016; Tedersoo et al. 
2018b), and are therefore not used for calculating SHs. 
Nevertheless, the FungalTraits users can still assign short 
ITS1 and ITS2 reads to SHs (Nilsson et al. 2019). In addi-
tion, we searched for potentially high-quality data from 
environmental studies including < 100 sequences, using 
the keywords ‘ectomyc’, ‘arbusc’, ‘ericoid’, ‘orchid’ and 
‘mycor’ to find studies on mycorrhizae. Similarly, we used 
the search terms ‘lichen’, ‘endoph’, ‘pathog’, ‘parasit’, ‘root’, 
‘aquatic’, ‘water’, and ‘marine’ to capture studies focusing 
on other guilds or specific underexplored habitat types. We 
also searched for taxonomic groups focusing on the genera 
of mycorrhizal fungi and molds as well as stramenopiles. 
Finally, we searched by names of coauthors to cover their 
own studies and to allocate annotation tasks to persons 
directly involved as much as possible. In total, we sought 
to annotate sequence data in 3,124 studies and unpublished 
submissions (4.34% of all submitted datasets) that jointly 
comprised 414,270 sequences (39.6% of all current fungal 
ITS sequences in INSDc).
Based on personal contacts and recommendations from 
other core group members, we invited experts in molecular 
ecology and phylogenetics to annotate sequence data from 
Table 2   Data fields and their 
properties for sequence-level 
annotation
Numbers in parentheses indicate the number of character states
Data field
Category
Field type
Level
Updated_study
Study
Text (DOI)
Mandatory
DNA_source
Source
Selection (51)
Mandatory
Culture_source
Source
Selection (43)
Specific
Animal/human_tissue
Source
Selection (30)
Specific
Guild
Guild
Selection (23)
Individual
Growth_form
Trait
Selection (10)
Individual
Ectomycorrhiza_exploration_type
Trait
Selection (6)
Individual
Ericoid_mycorrhiza_formation
Trait
Selection (4)
Individual
Endophytic_interaction_capacity
Trait
Selection (6)
Individual
Plant/fungal_pathogenic_capacity
Trait
Selection (9)
Individual
Animal/human_biotrophic_interaction_
capacity
Trait
Selection (19)
Individual
Interacting_taxon
Association
Text (Latin)
Specific
Co-occurring_taxa
Association
Text (Latin)
Specific
Strain
Collection
Text (code)
Individual
Specimen_voucher
Collection
Text (code)
individual
Type_status
Collection
Selection (16)
Individual
Country
Locality
Selection (243)
Mandatory
Sampling_area_State/Province
Locality
Text
individual
Locality_text
Locality
Text
individual
Latitude
Locality
Text (number)
mandatory
Longitude
Locality
Text (number)
Mandatory
Altitude
Locality
Text (number)
Individual
Depth
Locality
Text (number)
Individual
Biome
Locality
Selection (50)
Individual
Remarks
Varia
Text
Individual

Fungal Diversity	
1 3
30 to 50 INSDc studies per expert, with roughly comparable 
amounts of sequences. The studies were assigned to experts 
by considering authorship, taxonomic or guild-level exper-
tise and country of origin (in the case of China, India and 
Iran). The experts received specific instructions for annota-
tions (Supplementary Item 2) and sequence data sorted by 
studies, including all previous metadata located in multiple 
fields in the original INSDc format. The experts located and 
downloaded the studies assigned to them along with supple-
mentary material when relevant. Guided by information in 
these original studies and INSDc original data fields, experts 
filled in the data template (Supplementary Table 3) follow-
ing the standards. If the study was marked as unpublished, 
Google Scholar was used to find the DOI and update relevant 
study details as far as possible. When mandatory fields could 
not be filled with information in INSDc or the article, we 
instructed to contact corresponding authors of these studies. 
Not surprisingly, contact details of corresponding authors 
were difficult to find for unpublished studies, especially in 
the case of authors from China, because of very limited man-
datory information for data submission to INSDc. Pointing 
to personal details, INSDc refused to share contact informa-
tion of data submitters. In particular, older submissions were 
hard to track due to digital data decay (Oguz and Koehler 
2016).
In addition, FungalTraits curators also annotated data 
from the remaining studies and submissions by focusing 
on the fields ‘DNA_source’, ‘interacting_taxon’, ‘co-occur-
ring_taxa’ and ‘country’, using the data previously pre-
sent in INSDc in non-standard format or misallocated data 
fields (additional 42,772 submissions comprising 283,173 
sequences; 27.1% of INSDc fungal ITS sequences). These 
data were re-formatted according to our standards. The 
remaining sequences were mostly short ITS1 or ITS2 reads 
representing OTUs of HTS sequencing data. All annotated 
datasets were quality-checked and merged by a curator.
To annotate information about EcM fungal lineages and 
genera, we downloaded a more recent version 8.2 of UNITE 
that was released in January 2020. UNITE compound clus-
ters were searched for ectomycorrhizal fungi based on pre-
vious information about lineages and named genera. The 
respective compound clusters were browsed over the PlutoF 
workbench (Abarenkov et al. 2010) by checking taxonomy 
and alignments to locate chimeras and low-quality sequences 
and to update genus-level taxonomy and information about 
EcM fungal lineages following Tedersoo et al. (2011). Line-
age-level and taxonomic assignments were added in a batch 
mode using the command line.
To assign functional traits for each SH, we included 
the trait information obtained via annotation of sequences 
contained within SHs. Because of multiple gaps, comple-
mentary and conflicting information in the data, we used 
a probabilistic approach that is based on the proportion of 
specific character states relative to all annotated trait states 
for each trait per SH. In other words, SHs were considered 
to possess multiple functional trait states according to the 
share of these states across sequences.
Results
Genus‑level annotations
Across all data fields, the FungalTraits dataset contains 
58,479 units (filled cells) of trait information for fungi. We 
supplemented information about the ‘primary_lifestyle’ 
to 8859 out of the 10,210 (86.8%) fungal genera covered 
(Fig. 1). Other commonly annotated data fields included 
‘growth_form’ (85.9%; Fig. S1) and ‘aquatic_habitat’ 
(78.0%; Fig. S1). The ‘secondary_guild’ and specification 
to the primary guild (‘comment_on_lifestyle’) was given 
for 2280 (22.3%) and 525 (5.1%) genera, respectively. Of 
the primary lifestyle, wood saprotrophs (19.2%), plant 
pathogens (15.2%) and litter saprotrophs (11.1%; Fig. 1) 
were the most common in terms of the number of genera. 
Saprotrophic, plant pathogenic, endophytic and animal 
biotrophic capacities occurred in 43.6%, 15.2%, 1.2% and 
6.2% of the genera, respectively. Lichenised, ectomycor-
rhizal, and arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi were assigned to 
10.4%, 3.2% and 0.4% of the genera, respectively. Fruitbody 
and hymenium types were assigned to 70.7% and 69.7% 
of the genera, respectively (Fig. S1). Of the genera with 
information on growth form, filamentous (67.2%), thalloid 
(10.4%), and yeast (4.1%) forms prevailed. Non-aquatic 
genera clearly dominated (67.7%), followed by freshwater 
(1.9%) and marine (1.5%) taxa. Altogether 7.4% of the gen-
era included both aquatic and terrestrial species. Specific 
hosts were assigned to 5.3% of the genera, whereas primary 
and secondary photobionts were assigned to 9.2% and 0.3% 
of the genera (88.6% and 2.4% of genera of lichenised fungi 
as a primary lifestyle), respectively. Nearly all 1209 fungal 
genera with no trait information were described in the early 
days of mycology (i.e., before the 1950s) and had no recent 
information in internet-searchable publications.
With respect to stramenopiles, 682 units of trait infor-
mation were provided to 150 out of 151 genera. Primary 
and secondary lifestyles were provided for 93.4% and 20.5% 
of genera, respectively. Among fungus-like stramenopiles, 
plant pathogens (29.8%) and animal pathogens (20.5%) 
prevailed, followed by various saprotrophs (26.5% in total), 
many of which also have pathogenic potential or include 
one or more pathogenic species. Information about habitat 
type was provided for 92.7% of genera; various aquatic habi-
tats combined, terrestrial habitat and partly aquatic habitats 
taken together characterised 41.7%, 32.5% and 18.5% of 
genera, respectively (Fig. S2). We added information about 

	
Fungal Diversity
1 3
Algal parasite (6.8%)
Animal parasite (23.1%)
Litter saprotroph (5.1%)
Plant pathogen
Protist parasite
Soil saprotroph (1.7%)
Unspeciﬁed saprotroph (13.7%)
Unknown (8.5%)
Stramenopilous protists
Wood saprotroph (19.2%)
Plant pathogen (15.2%)
Litter saprotroph
(11.1%)
Lichenized (10.4%)
Soil saprotroph (5.6%)
Unspeciﬁed saprotroph (5.5%)
Animal parasite (5.4%)
Ectomycorrhizal (3.2%)
Lichen parasite (2.3%)
Mycoparasite (1.6%)
Dung saprotroph (1.1%)
Foliar endophyte (1%)
Epiphyte (1%)
Nectar/tap saprotroph (0.7%)
Animal endosymbiont (0.7%)
Other (2.2%)
All fungi
(35.9%)
Plant pathogen (15.6%)
Wood saprotroph (15.4%)
Lichenized
(14.3%)
Litter saprotroph
(12.1%)
Unspeciﬁed saprotroph
(6.1%)
Animal parasite (3.7%)
Soil saprotroph (3.4%)
Lichen parasite (2.9%)
Foliar endophyte (1.4%)
Dung saprotroph (1.3%)
Mycoparasite (1.2%)
Epiphyte (1.1%)
Nectar/tap saprotroph (1%)
Ectomycorrhizal (1%)
Other (1.5%)
Ascomycota
Wood saprotroph (37.7%)
Plant pathogen
(17.7%)
Ectomycorrhizal
(11.5%)
Soil saprotroph (10.7%)
Litter saprotroph (10%)
Unspeciﬁed saprotroph (4.4%)
Mycoparasite (2.5%)
Epiphyte (0.8%)
Animal parasite (0.7%)
Lichen parasite (0.6%)
Lichenized (0.6%)
Other (1.5%)
Basid omycota
i
(5.1%)
Algal parasite (31.1%)
Animal endosymbiont (0.7%)
Animal parasite (5.3%)
Animal−associated (4%)
Litter saprotroph (12.6%)
Mycoparasite (1.3%)
Plant pathogen (5.3%)
Pollen saprotroph (29.1%)
Protist parasite ( . %)
2 6
Soil saprotroph (4.6%)
Unspeciﬁed saprotroph (2%)
Unspeciﬁed symbiotroph (0.7%)
Wood saprotroph (0.7%)
Chytridiomycota
Algal parasite (5%)
Animal parasite
Plant pathogen (5%)
Entomopht oromycota
h
(90%)
Animal endosymbiont (72.1%)
Animal parasite (2.9%)
Dung saprotroph (2.9%)
Mycoparasite (5.9%)
Soil saprotroph (11.8%)
Unspeciﬁed pathotroph (1.5%)
Unspeciﬁed saprotroph (1.5%)
Unknown (1.5%)
Kickxellomycota
Arbuscular mycorrhizal (1.5%)
Dung saprotroph (1.5%)
Foliar endophyte (1.5%)
Mycoparasite (10.8%)
Plant pathogen (3.1%)
Soil saprotroph (80%)
Unspeciﬁed saprotroph (1.5%)
Mucoromycota
Animal parasite (52%)
Mycoparasite (24%)
Protist parasite (20%)
Unspeciﬁed pathotroph (4%)
Zoopagomycota
Animal parasite (94.3%)
Mycoparasite (0.4%)
Protist parasite (3.5%)
Unspeciﬁed saprotroph (1.3%)
Unknown (0.4%)
Rozellomycota
Fig. 1   Distribution of fungal genera by primary lifestyle in each fungal phyla as well as stramenopiles

Fungal Diversity	
1 3
growth forms to 94.0% of genera. The distribution of growth 
forms was strongly related to family- and higher-level taxon-
omy, with filamentous (rhizomycelial) (22.5%), alternating 
biflagellate-rhizomycelial (45.7%) and biflagellate (13.2%) 
forms dominating across all fungus-like stramenopile phyla.
ITS sequence annotations
We assessed metadata for 697,413 INSDc ITS sequences 
and added data to > 85% of these (Table 3). Roughly one-
third of the information present in the INSDc dataset was 
reformatted according to our standards. Information about 
lineages and genera of EcM fungi were added to > 30,000 
sequences, whereas 763 sequences were marked as of low-
quality or chimeric.
With respect to isolation source, living culture (20.0%), 
plant-associated (13.5%), soil (12.9%), and fruitbody 
(10.6%) were the most common sources of DNA. Further-
more, cultures that were subsequently sequenced, were 
mostly obtained from plant leaf (17.9%) and other plant-
associated material (33.9%; Fig. 2a). Of the interacting taxa, 
Homo sapiens (2.5%), Fagus sylvatica (0.8%), and Glycine 
max (0.8%) prevailed (Fig. 2b). The three most commonly 
annotated interacting guilds were ectomycorrhizal (2.9%), 
plant pathogens (2.1%), and arbuscular mycorrhizal (1.7%; 
Fig. S3).
The trait information associated with sequences 
(Table  S2) was integrated into Species Hypotheses 
(Table S3). The UNITE version 8.2. contains 310,368 eukar-
yote SHs distinguished at 1% dissimilarity (across 1,799,133 
sequences), of which 129,712 SHs (837,572 sequences) 
represent Fungi and 3061 SHs (33,566 sequences) are 
assigned to stramenopiles (including 1811 SHs and 27,834 
sequences of Oomycota). Traits information from the cur-
rent effort could be assigned to 92,623 (71.4%) of the fungal 
SHs. Altogether 139,196 (20.0%) out of the total 697,414 
sequences for which trait information was added, were not 
incorporated into any SH because of insufficient length or 
quality. The most commonly covered SH features included 
the country of origin (information available for 95.8% of 
the SHs), DNA isolation source (92.7%), and interacting 
taxa (47.2%). Interacting taxa were included as a list of gen-
era and higher-ranking taxa in cases where lower resolution 
taxonomic data was not available. For example, the top gen-
era Homo, Pinus and Quercus were associated with 4409, 
4316, and 3199 SHs, respectively. Conversely, 1546 host 
genera were associated with a single SH, indicating poor 
mycological coverage of most plant and animal groups. The 
largest SH (SH1688425.08; Fig. 3) corresponding to Alter-
naria eichhorniae includes 8326 sequences, with interact-
ing taxa (68.8% of sequences annotated with such informa-
tion) belonging to 492 plant genera (including 641 species) 
and 24 higher-level taxonomic ranks with no genus-level 
Table 3   The most commonly annotated characters and traits in fungal 
and stramenopile sequences as based on entry numbers
Fungi
Stramenopila
Number of sequences
680,882
16,531
DNA isolation source
565,298
13,791
Country
539,837
13,410
Interacting taxa
302,229
8628
Biome
145,704
6328
Guild
77,862
5158
0
20
40
60
80
Percent of annotated sequences
I
s
solation source
plant leaf
plant associated
living culture
soil
fruitbody
plant root
human
ectomycorrhiza
animal non human
-
rock
lichen
freshwater
plant stem
plant fruit
wood
other
DNA isolation source
Culture source
living culture
(a)
(b)
0
2
4
6
Hosts
Homo sapiens
Fagus sylvatica
Glycine max
Zea mays
Vitis vinifera
Picea abies
Trebouxia
Pinus sylvestris
Solanum tuberosum
Quercus semecarpifolia
Host
Percent of annotated sequences
Fig. 2   Distribution of annotated fungal sequences by DNA source. 
For ‘DNA isolation source’, trait states exceeding 1% abundance are 
presented; for ‘Culture source’, traits states exceeding 2% abundance 
are presented

	
Fungal Diversity
1 3
information. This SH was recorded from 88 countries across 
all continents.
Annotated sequences were assigned to 992 strameno-
pile SHs at 1% dissimilarity threshold. Of stramenopiles, 
Oomycota were relatively better annotated (52.2%) than 
other groups taken together. The three most commonly 
covered stramenopile characters included DNA isola-
tion source (99.1% of SHs), country of origin (96.0%) 
and interacting taxa (73.0%). The largest stramenopile SH 
(SH1791095.08FU) record corresponded to Phytophthora 
infestans that included 748 sequences, associating with five 
host genera.
Implementation
The genus-level and SH-level annotations represent stand-
alone datasets that are available as Table S1 and Table S3. 
The current version and future versions of FungalTraits can 
be downloaded from the UNITE homepage (https​://unite​.ut.
ee/repos​itory​.php). We intend to release a new FungalTraits 
version when UNITE SHs are updated. The original annota-
tions of genera and sequences remain attached to the genus 
names and sequence accession numbers, respectively. In new 
versions, the proportions of trait states will be re-calculated. 
For genus names, we do not consider any automatic proce-
dure when these are synonymised or split into new genera. 
We intend to consider annotations to newly described genera 
when major changes in taxonomy occur or within at least 
5 years.
Assignment of guild and trait information from Fungal-
Traits to custom ecological or phylogenetic datasets can be 
accomplished in several ways. Both genus-level and SH-
level traits are available in a ready-to-use comma-separated 
value (.csv) text format. The vlookup function in MS Excel 
and similar functions in other spreadsheet programs enable 
rapid assignment of functional trait states to genus names 
and SH codes in the taxonomic identification tables and 
OTU tables produced as an output in nearly all HTS bio-
informatics workflows. An example of using the vlookup 
function is given in Table S4.
To test the performance of FungalTraits, we used a global 
dataset of 50,589 OTUs (21,468 OTUs determined at the genus 
level; Tedersoo et al. 2014). Setting up the vlookup function for 
all fields and obtaining results took 9 min on a desktop PC. The 
same dataset took a roughly comparable amount of processing 
time for FUNGuild using the python script (Table S5).
Discussion
One of the main criticisms of HTS-based metabarcoding 
studies is that only diversity is assessed without addressing 
functional differences among taxa (Hongsanan et al. 2018; 
Nilsson et al. 2018; Zanne et al. 2020). Carefully curated 
sequence and taxon references would substantially benefit 
ecological interpretations of HTS studies (Nilsson et al. 
2018; Lücking et al. 2020). We have therefore developed a 
new combined approach for genus- and SH-level trait anno-
tation to promote functional information assignment to fungi 
and fungus-like stramenopiles in ecological and evolution-
ary research. Based on literature and taxonomic expertise, 
nearly all actively used fungal genera were functionally 
annotated to some extent, which doubles previous efforts in 
taxonomic breadth and increases the number of data points 
by an order of magnitude. Similarly, the standardised meta-
data added to sequences exceeds our previous effort a decade 
ago (Tedersoo et al. 2011) by an order of magnitude. To 
our knowledge, the process of calculating proportional traits 
based on individual sequences and sequenced individuals in 
species-level taxa (SHs) is entirely novel. This information 
complements the genus-level annotations of taxa with con-
trasting lifestyles or interacting taxa. Furthermore, SH-based 
trait annotation greatly adds to information about geographic 
distribution and ecology for fungal taxa that cannot be reli-
ably assigned to any known genus or higher ranking taxon.
Although the ecological traits of fungi are typically con-
served at the genus level and sometimes at higher taxonomic 
levels (Zanne et al. 2020), there are multiple occasions where 
the same species has diverse functions or members of the 
same genus display different trophic strategies and fall into 
different functional guilds (Nguyen et al. 2016; Selosse et al. 
2018). Besides the primary guild, which is expected to be the 
0
25
50
75
Isolation sources
plant leaf
plant associated
soil
plant root
plant stem
plant fruit
human
other
air
wood
living culture
plant seed
freshwater
marine water
Living culture
DNA isolation source
Culture source
Percentage of annotated sequences
Fig. 3   The most common trait states of the species hypothesis with 
the largest number of sequences (SH1688425.08FU), roughly corre-
sponding to a single biological species, Alternaria eichhorniae 

Fungal Diversity	
1 3
most characteristic to particular genera, we, therefore, gen-
erated extra fields for these secondary functions (including 
specification for particular species) and capacities to perform 
certain biotrophic functions such as the ability to perform as 
plant pathogens, endophytes, saprotrophs, or animal biotrophs 
including opportunistic parasitism in animals and humans. 
These fields enable researchers focused on specific objectives 
to find answers relevant to their questions more efficiently. 
Considering the needs of fungal and plant ecologists, we also 
added information about specific interacting taxa, reproductive 
structures, fruitbody form, and the capacity to inhabit aquatic 
environments. A majority of these trait fields are not covered 
in other fungal traits databases such as FacesOfFungi, FUN-
Guild and ­FunFun. Because our objective was to focus on a 
relatively small number of ecological traits with comprehen-
sive taxonomic coverage, other databases may be better suit-
able for finding alternative or more specific information. For 
example, we recommend researchers to visit the FacesOfFungi 
and Marine Fungi databases for more species-level informa-
tion about morphological characters and habitat. FUNGuild 
has the associated assignment probability field and compre-
hensive remarks about taxa with multiple lifestyles. ­FunFun 
gives an overview of most fungal traits recorded so far and 
it provides complementary information about a number of 
morphological (spores), biochemical (enzymes), geographic 
(known distribution) and genome-encoded (presence of cer-
tain metabolism-related genes) traits not covered by the first 
version of FungalTraits. ­FunFun database is designed to work 
in the R environment and it can be also used as a stand-alone 
database to perform quick searches.
Because of the simple.csv spreadsheet format, Fungal-
Traits can be used without skills in R or Python environ-
ments and it requires no dataset formatting prior to analyses. 
By selecting relevant data ields for the output, FungalTraits 
enables a custom choice of trait fields. The spreadsheet 
format is also helpful for rapid manual searches to check 
available information for selected taxa for any educational 
purpose. The functional assignment algorithms of all three 
databases are fully reproducible.
All taxonomic and trait assignment tools require final 
decision-making by users, considering the intended taxo-
nomic resolution, relevant functional groups, and sources. 
First, users should consider a suitable clustering approach 
and sequence similarity threshold for distinguishing 
OTUs or SHs and genera (Lindahl et al. 2013; Nilsson 
et al. 2018). Depending on molecular markers and taxo-
nomic groups, critical sequence dissimilarity thresholds 
for species and genus levels may vary (e.g. Garnica et al. 
2016). The same applies to a selection of a proper SH 
level (Kõljalg et al. 2013). It is also important to bear in 
mind that taxonomic and functional assignments should be 
conducted at appropriate taxonomic levels—as a rule of 
thumb, the sequence differences of the obtained OTUs to 
reference SHs should not exceed the clustering threshold.
For functional annotation of organisms, species-level 
assignments are certainly the most precise, but there are 
several technical obstacles for generating species-level 
functional databases. First, there is a huge number of 
described species, the amount of which can only be han-
dled by thousands of experts (Hawksworth and Lücking 
2017). Second, DNA sequence data suggest that a large 
proportion of morphological species are actually repre-
sented by several or even hundreds of molecular species 
that may conform better to the biological species criterion 
(Taylor et al. 2006; Lücking et al. 2014). Therefore, mul-
tiple SHs commonly represent the same morphological 
species. Typically, valid taxon names cannot be ascribed to 
a single SH, because the type specimen is not sequenced or 
information about this is missing. Alongside with previous 
efforts (Nilsson et al. 2014: Schoch et al. 2014), we anno-
tated type status to sequences representing type material, 
to be able to integrate traits information and other meta-
data with valid species names. In the future versions of 
FungalTraits, we intend to merge the taxonomy-based and 
sequence-based approaches by operating more on a spe-
cies/SH level and focus on species that have distinct traits 
compared with those characteristic of the rest of the genus.
To conclude, fungal traits data are increasingly used 
by ecologists, as judged from the number of citations to 
pioneer studies. Therefore, we propose FungalTraits—a 
global research community-supported, easy-to-use func-
tional traits database that covers multiple newly compiled 
traits and a large proportion of fungal and stramenopile 
taxa as well as their published sequences incorporated 
in Species Hypotheses. The straightforward spreadsheet 
format of the data provides easy data exchange options 
with other databases. In the future, we intend to estab-
lish the connection between SHs and species, so that it is 
possible to integrate traits derived from molecular iden-
tification and metadata with those derived from micro-
scopic and–omics studies of specimens. Experts and 
users who wish to update or revise species- and genus-
level traits and character states are guided to the online 
spreadsheet document FungalTraits ver. 1.2 is available 
at [URL https​://docs.googl​e.com/sprea​dshee​ts/d/1cxIm​
JWMYV​Tr6uI​QXcTL​wK1YN​NzQvK​JJifz​zNpKC​M6O0/
edit?usp=shari​ng] as of 16.12.2020. These suggestions are 
revised by curators and implemented in the next version 
of FungalTraits.
Acknowledgements  We thank Dr. Mario Saare for help with the R 
software.
Funding  Financial support was provided by Estonian Science Founda-
tion grants PSG136, PRG632, PUT1170, grant from the University of 

	
Fungal Diversity
1 3
Tartu (PLTOM20903), and the European Regional Development Fund 
(Centre of Excellence EcolChange).
Data availability  All necessary data is attached and available 
for public use.
Code availability  Not applicable.
Compliance with ethical standards 
Conflict of interest  There are no conflicts of interest to declare related 
to this study.
Ethical approval  Not applicable.
Consent to participate  Not applicable.
Consent for publication  All authors give their consent to publish this 
study in Fungal Diversity.
References
Abarenkov K, Tedersoo L, Nilsson RH, Vellak K, Saar I, Veldre 
V, Parmasto E, Prous M, Aan A, Ots M, Kurina O, Ostonen I, 
Jõgeva J, Halapuu S, Põldmaa K, Toots M, Truu J, Larsson K-H, 
Kõljalg U (2010) PlutoF: a web based workbench for ecologi-
cal and taxonomic research with an online implementation for 
fungal ITS sequences. Evol Bioinform 6:189–196
Agerer R (2001) Exploration types of ectomycorrhizae. Mycorrhiza 
11:107–114
Archibald JM, Archibald GB, Slamovits CH (eds) (2017) Handbook 
of the Protists. Springer, Cham
Banerjee S, Schlaeppi K, van der Heijden MG (2018) Keystone taxa 
as drivers of microbiome structure and functioning. Nat Rev 
Microbiol 16:567
Brown GD, Denning DW, Gow NA, Levitz SM, Netea MG, White 
TC (2012) Hidden killers: human fungal infections. Sci Transl 
Med 165:165rv113
Chauvet E, Cornut J, Sridhar KR, Selosse M-A, Bärlöcher F (2016) 
Beyond the water column: aquatic hyphomycetes outside their 
preferred habitat. Fung Ecol 19:112–127
Davison J, Moora M, Öpik M, Adholeya A, Ainsaar L, Ba A, Burla 
S, Diedhiou AG, Hiiesalu I, Jairus T, Johnson NC, Kane A, 
Koorem K, Kochar M, Ndiaye C, Pärtel M, Reier Ü, Saks Ü, 
Singh R, Vasar M, Zobel M (2015) Global assessment of arbus-
cular mycorrhizal fungus diversity reveals very low endemism. 
Science 28:970–973
De Hoog GS, Guarro J, Gené J, Figueras MJ (2018) Atlas of clinical 
Fungi, 4th ed. Westerdijk Institute/Universitat Rovira i Virgili, 
Utrecht/Reus
Fisher MC, Henk DA, Briggs CJ, Brownstein JS, Madoff LC, 
McCraw SL, Gurr SJ (2012) Emerging fungal threats to animal, 
plant and ecosystem health. Nature 484:186–194
Flores-Moreno H, Treseder KK, Cornwell WK, Maynard DS, Milo 
A, Abarenkov K, Afkhami ME, Aguilar-Trigueros CA, Bates S, 
Bhatnagar JM, Busby PE, Christian N, Crowther TW, Floudas 
D, Gazis R, Hibbett D, Kennedy PF, Lindner DL, Nilsson RH, 
Powell J, Schildhauer M, Schilling J, Zanne AE (2019) Fun-
galtraits aka ­FunFun: a dynamic functional trait database for the 
world’s fungi. https​://githu​b.com/trait​ecoev​o/funga​ltrai​ts
Floudas D, Bentzer J, Ahrén D, Johansson T, Persson P, Tunlid A 
(2020) Uncovering the hidden diversity of litter-decomposition 
mechanisms in mushroom-forming fungi. ISME J 14:2046–2059
Garnica S, Schön ME, Abarenkov K, Riess K, Liimatainen K, Nis-
kanen T, Dima B, Soop K, Frøslev TG, Jeppesen TS, Peintner U 
(2016) Determining threshold values for barcoding fungi: lessons 
from Cortinarius (Basidiomycota), a highly diverse and wide-
spread ectomycorrhizal genus. FEMS Microbiol Ecol 92:fiw045
Ghannoum M, Jurevic RJ, Mukherjee PK, Cui F, Sikaroodi M, Naqvi 
A, Gillevet PM (2010) Characterisation of the oral fungal microbi-
ome (Mycobiome) in healthy individuals. PLoS Path 6:e1000713
Grossart HP, Van den Wyngaert S, Kagami M, Wurzbacher C, Cunliffe 
M, Rojas-Jimenez K (2019) Fungi in aquatic ecosystems. Nat Rev 
Microbiol 17:339–354
Guerreiro MA, Wijayawardene NN, Hyde KD, Peršoh D (2018) Ecol-
ogy of Ascomycete genera: a searchable table of “Notes on gen-
era: Ascomycota”. Asian J Mycol 1:146–150
Hawksworth DL (1991) The fungal dimension of biodiversity: mag-
nitude, significance, and conservation. Mycol Res 95:641–655
Hawksworth DL, Lücking R (2017) Fungal diversity revisited: 2.2 to 
3.8 million species. Microbiol Spectr 1:79–95
Hongsanan S, Jeewon R, Purahong W, Xie N et al (2018) Can we use 
environmental DNA as holotypes? Fung Divers 92:1–30
Hyde KD, Al-Hatmi AM, Andersen B, Boekhout T, Buzina W, Dawson 
TL, Eastwood DC, Jones EG, de Hoog S, Kang Y, Longcore JE 
(2018) The world’s ten most feared fungi. Fung Divers 93:161–194
Hyde KD, Xu JC, Lumyong S, Rapior S et al (2019) The amazing 
potential of fungi, 50 ways we can exploit fungi industrially. Fung 
Divers 97:1–136
Irinyi L, Serena C, Garcia-Hermoso D, Arabatzis M, Desnos-Ollivier 
M, Vu D (2015) International Society of Human and Animal 
Mycology (ISHAM)-ITS reference DNA barcoding database—the 
quality controlled standard tool for routine identification of human 
and animal pathogenic fungi. Med Mycol 55:313–337
Jayasiri SC, Hyde KD, Ariyawansa HA, Bhat J, Buyck B, Cai L, Dai 
YC, Abd-Elsalam KA, Ertz D, Hidayat I, Jeewon R, Jones EBG, 
Bahkali AH, Karunarathna SC, Liu JK, Luangsa-ard JJ, Lumb-
sch HT, Maharachchikumbura SSN, McKenzie EHC, Moncalvo 
JM, Ghobad-Nejhad M, Nilsson H, Pang KA, Pereira OL, Phil-
lips AJL, Raspé O, Rollins AW, Romero AI, Etayo J, Selçuk F, 
Stephenson SL, Suetrong S, Taylor JE, Tsui CKM, Vizzini A, 
Abdel-Wahab MA, Wen TC, Boonmee S, Dai DQ, Daranagama 
DA, Dissanayake AJ, Ekanayaka AH, Fryar SC, Hongsanan S, 
Jayawardena RS, Li WJ, Perera RH, Phookamsak R, de Silva NI, 
Thambugala KM, Tian Q, Wijayawardene NN, Zhao RL, Zhao 
Q, Kang JC, Promputtha I (2015) The Faces of Fungi database: 
fungal names linked with morphology, phylogeny and human 
impacts. Fung Divers 74:3–18
Jones EG, Pang KL, Abdel-Wahab MA, Scholz B, Hyde KD, Boek-
hout T, Ebel R, Rateb ME, Henderson L, Sakayaroj J, Suetrong 
S (2019) An online resource for marine fungi. Fung Divers 
96:347–433
Kõljalg U, Nilsson RH, Abarenkov K, Tedersoo L, Taylor AFS, Bah-
ram M (2013) Towards a unified paradigm for sequence-based 
identification of Fungi. Mol Ecol 22:5271–5277
Kõljalg U, Tedersoo L, Nilsson RH, Abarenkov K (2016) Digital iden-
tifiers for fungal species. Science 352:1182–1183
Kurtzman CP, Fell JW, Boekhout T (eds) (2011) The yeasts, a taxo-
nomic study. Elsevier, Amsterdam
Levchenko MV, Kononchuk AG, Gerus AV, Lednev GR (2020) Dif-
ferential susceptibility of Locusta migratoria and Schistocerca 
gregaria (Orthoptera: Acrididae) to infection with entomopatho-
genic fungi. Plant Protect News 103:150–152
Lindahl BD, Nilsson RH, Tedersoo L, Abarenkov K, Carlsen T, Kjøller 
R, Kõljalg U, Pennanen T, Rosendahl S, Stenlid J, Kauserud H 

Fungal Diversity	
1 3
(2013) Fungal community analysis by high-throughput sequencing 
of amplified markers: a user’s guide. New Phytol 199:288–299
Lucas JA (2020) Plant pathology and plant pathogens. John Wiley & 
Sons, London
Lücking R, Aime MC, Robbertse B, Miller AN, Ariyawansa HA, Aoki 
T, Cardinali G, Crous PW, Druzhinina IS, Geiser DM, Hawks-
worth DL, Hyde KD, Irinyi L, Jeewon R, Johnston PR, Kirk PM 
Malosso E, May TW, Meyer W, Öpik M, Robert V, Seifert KA, 
Stadler M, Thines M, Vu D, Yurkov AM, Zhang N, Schoch CL 
(2014) A single macrolichen constitutes hundreds of unrecognised 
species. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111:11091–11096
Lücking R, Aime MC, Robbertse B, Miller AN, Ariyawansa HA, Aoki 
T, Hawksworth DL (2020) Unambiguous identification of fungi: 
where do we stand and how accurate and precise is fungal DNA 
barcoding? IMA Fungus 111:1–32
Mayor JR, Schuur EAG, Henkel TW (2009) Elucidating the nutritional 
dynamics of fungi using stable isotopes. Ecol Lett 12:171–183
McDonald D, Clemente JC, Kuczynski J, Rideout JR, Stombaugh J, 
Wendel D, Knight R (2012) The Biological Observation Matrix 
(BIOM) format or: how I learned to stop worrying and love the 
ome-ome. GigaScience 1:7
McLaughlin DJ, Spatafora JW (2014) The Mycota 7. Systematics and 
Evolution, Springer, Heidelberg
Meyer V, Basenko EY, Benz JP, Braus GH, Caddick MX, Csukai M, 
De Vries RP, Endy D, Frisvad JC, Gunde-Cimerman N (2020) 
Growing a circular economy with fungal biotechnology: a white 
paper. Fung Biol Biotechnol 7:1–23
Mueller UG, Gerardo NM, Aanen DK, Six DL, Schultz TR (2005) 
The evolution of agriculture in insects. Annu Rev Ecol Evol Syst 
36:563–595
Nguyen NH, Song Z, Bates ST, Branco S, Tedersoo L, Menke J, Schil-
ling JS, Kennedy PG (2016) FUNGuild: an open annotation tool 
for parsing fungal community datasets by ecological guild. Fung 
Ecol 20:241–248
Nilsson RH, Hyde KD, Pawłowska J, Ryberg M, Tedersoo L, Aas AB, 
Alias SA, Alves A, Anderson CL, Antonelli A, Arnold AE, Bah-
nmann B, Bahram M, Bengtsson-Palme J, Berlin A, Branco S, 
Chomnunti P, Dissanayake A, Drenkhan R, Friberg H, Frøslev 
TG, Halwachs B, Hartmann M, Henricot B, Jayawardena R, 
Jumpponen A, Kauserud H, Koskela S, Kulik T, Liimatainen K, 
Lindahl BD, Lindner D, Liu J-K, Maharachchikumbura S, Man-
amgoda D, Martinsson S, Neves MA, Niskanen T, Nylinder S, 
Pereira OL, Pinho DB, Porter TM, Queloz V, Riit T, Sánchez-
García M, Sousa FD, Stefańczyk E, Tadych M, Takamatsu S, Tian 
Q, Udayanga D, Unterseher M, Wang Z, Wikee S, Yan J, Larsson 
E, Larsson K-H, Kõljalg U, Abarenkov K (2014) Improving ITS 
sequence data for identification of plant pathogenic fungi. Fung 
Divers 67:11–19
Nilsson RH, Anslan S, Bahram M, Wurzbacher C, Baldrian P, Tedersoo 
L (2018) Mycobiome diversity: high-throughput sequencing and 
identification of fungi. Nat Rev Microbiol 17:95–109
Nilsson RH, Larsson KH, Taylor AF, Bengtsson-Palme J, Jeppesen 
TS, Schigel D, Kennedy P, Picard K, Glöckner FO, Tedersoo L, 
Saar I, Kõljalg U, Abarenkov K (2019) The UNITE database for 
molecular identification of fungi: handling dark taxa and parallel 
taxonomic classifications. Nucl Acids Res 47:D259–D264
Oberwinkler F, Riess K, Bauer R, Kirschner R, Garnica S (2013) Taxo-
nomic re-evaluation of the Ceratobasidium-Rhizoctonia complex 
and Rhizoctonia butinii, a new species attacking spruce. Mycol 
Progr 12:763–776
Oguz F, Koehler W (2016) URL decay at year 20: a research note. J 
Assoc Inform Sci Technol 67:477–479
Pavlova NA, Sokornova SV (2018) Effect of drying on viability of dif-
ferent ages mycelium of Stagonospora cirsii. Plant Protect News 
4:67–69
Peay KG, Kennedy PG, Talbot JM (2016) Dimensions of biodiversity 
in the Earth mycobiome. Nat Rev Microbiol 14:434–447
Pöggeler S, Wöstemeyer J (2011) The Mycota XIV. Evolution of fungi 
and fungal-like organisms. Springer, Berlin
Põlme S, Bahram M, Jacquemyn H, Kennedy P, Kohout P, Moora M, 
Oja J, Öpik M, Pecoraro L, Tedersoo L (2018) Host preference 
and network properties in biotrophic plant–fungal associations. 
New Phytol 217:1230–1239
Promputtha I, Jeewon R, Lumyong S, McKenzie EHC, Hyde KD 
(2005) Ribosomal DNA fingerprinting in the identification of non 
sporulating endophytes from Magnolia liliifera (Magnoliaceae). 
Fung Divers 20:167–186
Promputtha I, Lumyong S, Dhanasekaran V, McKenzie EHC, Hyde 
KD, Jeewon R (2007) A phylogenetic evaluation of whether 
endophytes become saprotrophs at host senescence. Microb Ecol 
53:579–590
Rambold G, Agerer R (1997) DEEMY: the concept of a characterisa-
tion and determination system for ectomycorrhizae. Mycorrhiza 
7:113–116
Rambold G, Zedda L, Coyle JR, Peršoh D, Köhler T, Triebel D (2016) 
Geographic heat maps of lichen traits derived by combining LIAS 
light description and GBIF occurrence data, provided on a new 
platform. Biodiv Conserv 25:2743–2751
Riley R, Salamov AA, Brown DW, Nagy LG, Floudas D, Held BW, 
Levasseur A, Lombard V, Morin E, Otillar R, Lindquist EA (2014) 
Extensive sampling of basidiomycete genomes demonstrates inad-
equacy of the white rot/brown rot paradigm for wood decay fungi. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111:9923–9928
Rodriguez RJ, White JF, Arnold AE, Redman RS (2009) Fungal endo-
phytes: diversity and functional roles. New Phytol 182:314–330
Ryan ET, Hill DR, Solomon T, Endy TP, Aronson N (2019) Hunter’s 
tropical medicine and emerging infectious diseases e-book. Else-
vier, Canada
Schoch CL, Robbertse B, Robert V, Vu D, Cardinali G, Irinyi L, Kõl-
jalg U, Tedersoo L, Federnse S (2014) Finding needles in hay-
stacks: linking scientific names, reference specimens and molecu-
lar data for Fungi. Database 2014:1–21
Selosse MA, Schneider-Maunoury L, Martos F (2018) Time to re-think 
Fungal ecology? Fungal ecological niches are often prejudged. 
New Phytol 217:968–972
Shearer CA, Raja HA (2010) Freshwater ascomycetes database. http://
fungi​.life.illin​ois.edu/. Accessed 01 August 2020
Smith SE, Read DJ (2008) Mycorrhizal symbiosis, 3rd ed. Academic 
Press, London
Soonvald L, Loit K, Runno-Paurson E, Astover A, Tedersoo L (2019) 
The role of long-term mineral and organic fertilisation treatment 
in changing pathogen and symbiont community composition in 
soil. Appl Soil Ecol 141:45–53
Taylor JW, Turner E, Townsend JP, Dettman JR, Jacobson D (2006) 
Eukaryotic microbes, species recognition and the geographic lim-
its of species: examples from the kingdom Fungi. Phil Trans R 
Soc B 361:1947–1963
Tedersoo L, Smith ME (2013) Lineages of ectomycorrhizal fungi revis-
ited: foraging strategies and novel lineages revealed by sequences 
from belowground. Fung Biol Rev 27:83–99
Tedersoo L, Smith ME (2017) Ectomycorrhizal fungal lineages: detec-
tion of four new groups and notes on consistent recognition of 
ectomycorrhizal taxa in high-throughput sequencing studies. Ecol 
Stud 230:125–142
Tedersoo L, Abarenkov K, Nilsson RH, Schüβler A, Grelet G-A, 
Kohout P, Oja J, Bonito GM, Veldre V, Jairus T, Ryberg M, Lars-
son K-H, Kõljalg U (2011) Tidying up International Nucleotide 
Sequence Databases: ecological, geographical and sequence qual-
ity annotation of ITS sequences of mycorrhizal fungi. PLoS ONE 
6:e24940

	
Fungal Diversity
1 3
Tedersoo L, Bahram M, Põlme S, Kõljalg U, Yorou NS, Wijesundera 
R, Villarreal-Ruiz L, Vasco-Palacios A, Quang Thu P, Suija A, 
Smith ME, Sharp C, Saluveer E, Saitta A, Ratkowsky D, Pritsch 
K, Riit T, Põldmaa K, Piepenbring M, Phosri C, Peterson M, Parts 
K, Pärtel K, Otsing E, Nouhra E, Njouonkou AL, Nilsson RH, 
Morgado LN, Mayor J, May TW, Kohout P, Hosaka K, Hiiesalu 
I, Henkel TW, Harend H, Guo L, Greslebin A, Grelet G, Geml J, 
Gates G, Dunstan W, Dunk C, Drenkhan R, Dearnaley J, De Kesel 
A, Dang T, Chen X, Buegger F, Brearley FQ, Bonito G, Anslan 
S, Abell S, Abarenkov K (2014) Global diversity and geography 
of soil fungi. Science 346:1078
Tedersoo L, Sánchez-Ramírez S, Kõljalg U, Bahram M, Döring M, 
Schigel D, May T, Ryberg M, Abarenkov K (2018a) High-level 
classification of the Fungi and a tool for evolutionary ecological 
analyses. Fung Divers 90:135–159
Tedersoo L, Tooming-Klunderud A, Anslan S (2018b) PacBio meta-
barcoding of fungi and other eukaryotes: biases and perspectives. 
New Phytol 217:1370–1385
Tedersoo L, Anslan S, Bahram M, Drenkhan R, Pritsch K, Buegger F, 
Padari A, Hagh-Doust N, Mikryukov V, Kõljalg U, Abarenkov K 
(2020) Regional-scale in-depth analysis of soil fungal diversity 
reveals strong pH and plant species effects in Northern Europe. 
Front Microbiol 11:1953
Tisthammer KH, Cobian GM, Amend AS (2016) Global biogeogra-
phy of marine fungi is shaped by the environment. Fung Ecol 
19:39–46
Triebel D, Peršoh D, Nash TH III, Zedda L, Rambold G (2007) LIAS: 
an interactive database system for structured descriptive data of 
Ascomycetes. In: Currey GB, Humphries CJ (eds) Biodiversity 
databases. Techniques, Politics, and Applications. Syst Assoc 
Spec 73:99–110
Veldre V, Abarenkov K, Bahram M, Martos F, Selosse MA, Tamm 
H, Kõljal U, Tedersoo L (2013) Evolution of nutritional modes 
of Ceratobasidiaceae (Cantharellales, Basidiomycota) asrevealed 
from publicly available ITS sequences. Fungal Ecology 6:256–268
Větrovský T, Morais D, Kohout P, Lepinay C, Algora C, Hollá SA, 
Bahnmann BD, Bílohnědá K, Brabcová V, D’Alò F, Human ZR, 
Jomura M, Kolařík M, Kvasničková J, Lladó S, López-Mondéjar 
R, Martinović T, Mašínová T, Meszárošová L, Michalčíková L, 
Michalová T, Mundra S, Navrátilová D, Odriozola I, Piché-Cho-
quette S, Štursová M, Švec K, Tláskal V, Urbanová M, Vlk L, 
Voříšková J, Žifčáková L, Baldrian P (2020) GlobalFungi, a global 
database of fungal occurrences from high-throughput-sequencing 
metabarcoding studies. Sci Data 7:1–14
Weete JD, Abril M, Blackwell M (2010) Phylogenetic distribution of 
fungal sterols. PLoS ONE 5:e10899
Wijayawardene NN, Hyde KD, Al-Ani LKT, Tedersoo L, Haelewa-
ters D, Rajeshkumar KC, Zhao RL, Aptroot A, Leontyev VD, 
Saxena RK, Tokarev YS, Dai DQ, Letcher PM, Stephenson 
SL, Ertz D, Lumbsch HT, Kukwa M, Issi V, Madrid H, Phil-
lips AJL, Selbmann L, Pfliegler WP, Horvath E, Bensch K, Kirk 
PM, Kolarikova K, Raja HA, Radek R, Papp V, Dima B, Ma J, 
Malosso E, Takamatsu S, Rambold G, Gannibal PB, Triebel D, 
Gautam AK, Avasthi S, Suetrong S, Timdal E, Fryar SC, Delgado 
G, Reblova M, Doilom M, Dolatabadi S, Pawlowska JZ, Hum-
ber RA, Kodsueb R, Sanchez-Castro I, Goto BT, Silva DKA, de 
Souza FA, Oehl FR, da Silva GA, Silva IR, Blaszkowski J, Jobim 
K, Maia LC, Barbosa FR, Fiuza PO, Divakar PK, Shenoy BD, 
Castaneda-Ruiz RF, Somrithipol S, Lateef AA, Karunarathna SC, 
Tibpromma S, Mortimer PE, Wanasinghe DN, Phookamsak R, 
Xu J, Wang Y, Tian F, Alvarado P, Li DW, Kusan I, Matocec N, 
Masic A, Tkalcec Z, Maharachchikumbura SSN, Papizadeh M, 
Heredia G, Wartchow F, Bakhshi M, Boehm E, Youssef N, Hustad 
VP, Lawrey JD, Santiago ALCMA, Bezerra JDP, Souza-Motta 
CM, Firmino AL, Tian Q, Houbraken J, Hongsanan S, Tanaka K, 
Dissanayake AJ, Monteiro JS, Grossart HP, Suija A, Weerakoon 
G, Etayo J, Tsurykau A, Vazquez V, Mungai P, Damm U, Li RQ, 
Zhang H, Boonmee S, Lu YZ, Becerra AG, Kendrick B, Brearley 
FQ, Motiejunaite J, Sharma B, Khare R, Gaikwad S, Wijesundara 
DSA, Tang LZ, He MQ, Flakus A, Rodriguez-Flakus P, Zhur-
benko MP, McKenzie EHC, Stadler M, Bhat DJ, Liu JK, Raza M, 
Jeewon R, Nassonova ES, Prieto M, Jayalal RGU, Erdogdu M, 
Yurkov A, Schnittler M, Shchepin ON, Novozhilov YK, Silva-
Filho AGS, Gentekaki E, Liu P, Cavender JC, Kang Y, Moham-
mad S, Zhang LF, Xu RF, Li MY, Dayarathne MC, Ekanayaka 
AH, Wen TC, Deng CY, Pereira OL, Navathe S, Hawksworth DL, 
Fan XL, Dissanayake LS, Kuhnert E, Thines M (2020) Outline of 
Fungi and fungus-like taxa. Mycosphere 11:1060–1456
Zanne AE, Abarenkov K, Afkhami ME, Aguilar-Trigueros CA, Bates 
S, Bhatnagar JM, Busby PE, Christian N, Cornwell W, Crowther 
TW, Moreno HF (2020) Fungal functional ecology: bring-
ing a trait-based approach to plant-associated fungi. Biol Rev 
95:409–433
Affiliations
Sergei Põlme1,2   · Kessy Abarenkov2 · R. Henrik Nilsson3,4 · Björn D. Lindahl5 · Karina Engelbrecht Clemmensen6 · 
Havard Kauserud7 · Nhu Nguyen8 · Rasmus Kjøller9 · Scott T. Bates10 · Petr Baldrian11 · Tobias Guldberg Frøslev12 · 
Kristjan Adojaan1 · Alfredo Vizzini13 · Ave Suija1 · Donald Pfister14 · Hans‑Otto Baral15 · Helle Järv16 · 
Hugo Madrid17,18 · Jenni Nordén19 · Jian‑Kui Liu20 · Julia Pawlowska21 · Kadri Põldmaa1 · Kadri Pärtel1 · 
Kadri Runnel1 · Karen Hansen22 · Karl‑Henrik Larsson3,23 · Kevin David Hyde24 · Marcelo Sandoval‑Denis25 · 
Matthew E. Smith26 · Merje Toome‑Heller27 · Nalin N. Wijayawardene28 · Nelson Menolli Jr.29,30 · 
Nicole K. Reynolds26 · Rein Drenkhan31 · Sajeewa S. N. Maharachchikumbura20 · Tatiana B. Gibertoni32 · 
Thomas Læssøe33 · William Davis34 · Yuri Tokarev35 · Adriana Corrales36 · Adriene Mayra Soares37 · Ahto Agan1 · 
Alexandre Reis Machado32 · Andrés Argüelles‑Moyao38 · Andrew Detheridge39 · Angelina de Meiras‑Ottoni32 · 
Annemieke Verbeken40 · Arun Kumar Dutta41 · Bao‑Kai Cui42 · C. K. Pradeep43 · César Marín44,45 · Daniel Stanton46 · 
Daniyal Gohar1 · Dhanushka N. Wanasinghe47 · Eveli Otsing1 · Farzad Aslani1 · Gareth W. Griffith39 · 
Thorsten H. Lumbsch48 · Hans‑Peter Grossart49,50 · Hossein Masigol51 · Ina Timling52 · Inga Hiiesalu1 · Jane Oja1 · 
John Y. Kupagme1 · József Geml53 · Julieta Alvarez‑Manjarrez38 · Kai Ilves1 · Kaire Loit54 · Kalev Adamson31 · 

Fungal Diversity	
1 3
Kazuhide Nara55 · Kati Küngas1 · Keilor Rojas‑Jimenez56 · Krišs Bitenieks57 · Laszlo Irinyi58,59 · László Laszlo Nagy60 · 
Liina Soonvald54 · Li‑Wei Zhou61 · Lysett Wagner62 · M. Catherine Aime63 · Maarja Öpik1 · María Isabel Mujica64 · 
Martin Metsoja1 · Martin Ryberg65 · Martti Vasar1 · Masao Murata55 · Matthew P. Nelsen48 · Michelle Cleary66 · 
Milan C. Samarakoon24 · Mingkwan Doilom47 · Mohammad Bahram1,67 · Niloufar Hagh‑Doust1 · 
Olesya Dulya1,68 · Peter Johnston69 · Petr Kohout11 · Qian Chen61 · Qing Tian24 · Rajasree Nandi70 · 
Rasekh Amiri1 · Rekhani Hansika Perera24 · Renata dos Santos Chikowski32 · Renato L. Mendes‑Alvarenga32 · 
Roberto Garibay‑Orijel38 · Robin Gielen1 · Rungtiwa Phookamsak47 · Ruvishika S. Jayawardena24 · Saleh Rahimlou1 · 
Samantha C. Karunarathna47 · Saowaluck Tibpromma47 · Shawn P. Brown71 · Siim‑Kaarel Sepp1 · Sunil Mundra7,72 · 
Zhu‑Hua Luo73 · Tanay Bose74 · Tanel Vahter1 · Tarquin Netherway67 · Teng Yang75 · Tom May76 · Torda Varga60 · 
Wei Li77 · Victor Rafael Matos Coimbra32 · Virton Rodrigo Targino de Oliveira32 · Vitor Xavier de Lima32 · 
Vladimir S. Mikryukov1 · Yongzhong Lu78 · Yosuke Matsuda79 · Yumiko Miyamoto80 · Urmas Kõljalg1,2 · 
Leho Tedersoo1,2
 *	 Sergei Põlme 
	
sergei.polme@gmail.com
1	
Institute of Ecology and Earth Sciences, University of Tartu, 
14A Ravila, 50411 Tartu, Estonia
2	
Natural History Museum, University of Tartu, 46 Vanemuise 
Str, 51003 Tartu, Estonia
3	
Gothenburg Global Biodiversity Centre, Box 461, 
405 30 Gothenburg, Sweden
4	
Department of Biological and Environmental Sciences, 
University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden
5	
Department of Soil and Environment, Swedish University 
of Agricultural Sciences, Box 7014, 750 07 Uppsala, Sweden
6	
Department of Forest Mycology and Plant Pathology, 
Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Box 7026, 
750 07 Uppsala, Sweden
7	
Section for Genetics and Evolutionary Biology (EvoGene), 
Department of Biosciences, University of Oslo, 
P.O. Box 1066, Blindern, NO‑0316 Oslo, Norway
8	
University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa, 3190 Maile Way, St. John 
102, Honolulu, HI, USA
9	
Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen, 
Universitetsparken 15, 2100 Copenhagen Ø, Denmark
10	 Purdue University Northwest, Westville, IN 46391, USA
11	 Institute of Microbiology, Czech Academy of Sciences, 
Videnska 1083, 14220 Praha 4, Czech Republic
12	 GLOBE Institute, University of Copenhagen, Øster 
Farimagsgade 5, KH7.2.32, 1353 Copenhagen, Denmark
13	 Dipartimento di Scienze della Vita e Biologia dei Sistemi, 
Università di Torino, Viale Mattioli 25, 10125 Torino, Italy
14	 Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology 
and Farlow Library and Herbarium, Harvard University, 22 
Divinity Ave, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
15	 Blaihofstr. 42, 72074 Tübingen, Germany
16	 SYNLAB Estonia, Veerenni 53a, Tallinn 11313, Estonia
17	 Escuela de Tecnología Médica, Universidad Santo Tomás, 
Los Carreras 753, Osorno, Chile
18	 Centro de Genómica y Bioinformática, Universidad Mayor, 
Camino La Pirámide 5750, Huechuraba, Santiago, Chile
19	 Norwegian Institute for Nature Research (NINA), Sognsveien 
68, 0855 Oslo, Norway
20	 School of Life Science and Technology, University 
of Electronic Science and Technology of China, 
Chengdu 611731, People’s Republic of China
21	 Evolutionary Biology, Faculty of Biology, Biological 
and Chemical Research Centre, University of Warsaw, 
ul. Zwirki i Wigury 101, 02‑089 Warsaw, Poland
22	 Department of Botany, Swedish Museum of Natural History, 
P.O. Box 50007, 10405 Stockholm, Sweden
23	 Gothenburg Global Biodiversity Centre, P.O. Box 461, 
405 30 Gothenburg, Sweden
24	 Center of Excellence in Fungal Research, Mae Fah Luang 
University, Chiang Rai 57100, Thailand
25	 Westerdijk Fungal Biodiversity Institute, Utrecht, 
The Netherlands
26	 Department of Plant Pathology, University of Florida, 
Gainesville, FL, USA
27	 Plant Health and Environment Laboratory, Ministry 
for Primary Industries, Auckland 1140, New Zealand
28	 Center for Yunnan Plateau Biological Resources Protection 
and Utilisation, Qujing Normal University, Qujing 655011, 
Yunnan, China
29	 Instituto Federal de Educação, Ciência e Tecnologia de São 
Paulo (IFSP), Câmpus São Paulo, Rua Pedro Vicente 625, 
Canindé, São Paulo, SP 01109‑010, Brazil
30	 Instituto de Botânica, Núcleo de Pesquisa em Micologia, 
Av. Miguél Stefano 3687, Água Funda, São Paulo, 
SP 04301‑012, Brazil
31	 Institute of Agricultural and Environmental Sciences, 
Estonian University of Life Sciences, Fr. R. Kreutzwaldi 5, 
51006 Tartu, Estonia
32	 Departamento de Micologia, Universidade Federal de 
Pernambuco, Avenida da Engenharia, S/N ‑ Cidade 
Universitária, 50740‑600 Recife, PE, Brazil
33	 Department of Biology & Globe Institute, University 
of Copenhagen, Universitetsparken 15, 2100 Copenhagen Ø, 
Denmark
34	 ARS Research Participation Program, Oak Ridge Institute 
for Science and Education, Oak Ridge, TN 37830, USA

	
Fungal Diversity
1 3
35	 All-Russian Institute of Plant Protection, Podbelskogo 3 
Pushkin, St Petersburg 196608, Russia
36	 Department of Biology, Universidad del Rosario, Carrera 24 
# 63C‑69, Bogota, DC 111221, Colombia
37	 Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Federal Rural da 
Amazônia, Tomé‑Açu, Rodovia PA‑451, Km 03, 68.680‑000, 
Bairro Açaizal 68.680‑000, Brazil
38	 Instituto de Biología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de 
México, Mexico City, Mexico
39	 Institute of Biological, Environmental and Rural Sciences, 
Aberystwyth University, Wales, UK
40	 Research Group Mycology, Department of Biology, Ghent 
University, Ledeganckstraat 35, 9000 Ghent, Belgium
41	 Department of Botany, West Bengal State University, 
Barasat, North‑24‑Parganas, West Bengal 700126, India
42	 Institute of Microbiology, School of Ecology and Nature 
Conservation, Beijing Forestry University, Beijing 100083, 
China
43	 Jawaharlal Nehru Tropical Botanic Garden & Research 
Institute (JNTBGRI), Palode, Thiruvananthapuram, 
Kerala 695562, India
44	 Institute of Agri‑food, Animal and Environmental Sciences 
(ICA3), Universidad de O’Higgins, 3070000 San Fernando, 
Chile
45	 Center of Applied Ecology and Sustainability (CAPES), 
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, 8320000 Santiago, 
Chile
46	 Department of Ecology, Evolution and Behavior, University 
of Minnesota-Twin Cities, Saint Paul, MN 55108, USA
47	 CAS Key Laboratory for Plant Diversity and Biogeography 
of East Asia, Kunming Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy 
of Sciences, Kunming 650201, Yunnan, China
48	 Science and Education and The Grainger Bioinformatics 
Center, The Field Museum, 1400 S. Lake Shore Dr., Chicago, 
IL 60605, USA
49	 Department of Experimental Limnology, Leibniz 
Institute of Freshwater Ecology and Inland Fisheries, Alte 
Fischerhuette 2, 16775 Stechlin, Germany
50	 Institute of Biochemistry and Biology, Potsdam University, 
Maulbeerallee 2, 14469 Potsdam, Germany
51	 Department of Plant Protection, University of Guilan, Rasht, 
Iran
52	 Institute of Arctic Biology, University of Alaska, Fairbanks, 
311 Irving I Building, 2140 Koyukuk Drive, PO Box 757000, 
Fairbanks, AK 99775‑7000, USA
53	 MTA‑EKE Lendület Environmental Microbiome Research 
Group, Eszterházy Károly University, Eger, Hungary
54	 Institute of Agricultural and Environmental Sciences, 
Estonian University of Life Sciences, Tartu, Estonia
55	 Department of Natural Environmental Studies, University 
of Tokyo, 5‑1‑5 Kashiwanoha, Kashiwa 277‑0882, Chiba, 
Japan
56	 Escuela de Biologia, Universidad de Costa Rica, 
11501 San Jose, Costa Rica
57	 Genetic Resource Centre, Latvian State Forest Research 
Institute “Silava”, 111 Rigas str, Salaspils LV‑2169, Latvia
58	 Sydney Medical School and Westmead Clinical School 
and Westmead Institute for Medical Research, University 
of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia
59	 Westmead Hospital, Sydney, NSW, Australia
60	 Biological Research Center Szeged, 6726 Szeged, Hungary
61	 State Key Laboratory of Mycology, Institute of Microbiology, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China
62	 National Reference Center for Invasive Fungal Infections 
(NRZMyk), Leibniz Institute forNatural Product Research 
and Infection Biology – Hans Knöll Institute (HKI), Jena, 
Germany
63	 Department of Botany and Plant Pathology, Purdue 
University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA
64	 Departamento de Ecología, Pontificia Universidad Católica 
de Chile, Alameda 340, Santiago, Chile
65	 Department of Organismal Biology, Uppsala University, 
Uppsala, Sweden
66	 Southern Swedish Forest Research Centre, Swedish 
University of Agricultural Sciences (SLU), Alnarp, Sweden
67	 Department of Ecology, Swedish University of Agricultural 
Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden
68	 Institute of Plant and Animal Ecology, Ural Branch, Russian 
Academy of Sciences, 8th MarchStreet 202/3, Ekaterinburg, 
Russia 620144
69	 Manaaki Whenua - Landcare Research, Private Bag 92170, 
Auckland 1142, New Zealand
70	 Institute of Forestry and Environmental Sciences, University 
of Chittagong, Chittagong, Bangladesh
71	 Department of Biological Sciences, University of Memphis, 
Memphis, TN, USA
72	 Department of Biology, College of Science, United Arab 
Emirates University, Al‑Ain, Abu‑Dhabi, UAE
73	 Key Laboratory of Marine Biogenetic Resources, Third 
Institute of Oceanography, Ministry of Natural Resources, 
184 Daxue Road, Xiamen 361005, China
74	 Department of Biochemistry, Genetics and Microbiology, 
Forestry Agricultural Biotechnology Institute (FABI), 
University of Pretoria, Pretoria, South Africa
75	 State Key Laboratory of Soil and Sustainable Agriculture, 
Institute of Soil Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, East 
Beijing Road 71, Nanjing 210008, China
76	 Royal Botanic Gardens Victoria, Melbourne, VIC 3004, 
Australia
77	 College of Marine Life Sciences, Ocean University of China, 
Qingdao 266003, China
78	 School of Food and Pharmaceutical Engineering, Guizhou 
Institute of Technology, Guiyang 550003, China
79	 Graduate School of Bioresources, Mie University, Mie, Japan
80	 Arctic Research Center, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan
View publication stats
