Consequences of biodiversity loss for litter
decomposition across biomes
I. Tanya Handa1,2, Rien Aerts3, Frank Berendse4, Matty P. Berg3, Andreas Bruder5,6, Olaf Butenschoen7, Eric Chauvet8,9,
Mark O. Gessner5,6,10,11, Je´re´my Jabiol8,9, Marika Makkonen3,12, Brendan G. McKie13,14, Bjo¨rn Malmqvist{,
Edwin T. H. M. Peeters15, Stefan Scheu7, Bernhard Schmid16, Jasper van Ruijven4, Veronique C. A. Vos4 & Stephan Ha¨ttenschwiler1
The decomposition of dead organic matter is a major determinant
of carbon and nutrient cycling in ecosystems, and of carbon fluxes
between the biosphere and the atmosphere1–3. Decomposition is
driven by a vast diversity of organisms that are structured in com-
plex food webs2,4. Identifying the mechanisms underlyingtheeffects
of biodiversity on decomposition is critical4–6 given the rapid loss of
species worldwide andthe effects ofthisloss onhumanwell-being7–9.
Yet despite comprehensive syntheses of studies on how biodiversity
affectslitterdecomposition4–6,10,keyquestionsremain,includingwhen,
where and how biodiversity has a role and whether general patterns
and mechanisms occur across ecosystems and different functional
types of organism4,9–12. Here, in field experiments across five terrest-
rial and aquatic locations, ranging from the subarctic to the tropics,
weshowthatreducingthefunctionaldiversityofdecomposer organ-
isms and plantlittertypesslowedthecyclingoflittercarbonandnitro-
gen.Moreover,wefoundevidenceofnitrogentransferfromthelitter
of nitrogen-fixing plants to that of rapidly decomposing plants, but
not between other plant functional types, highlighting that specific
interactions in litter mixtures control carbon and nitrogen cycling
duringdecomposition.Theemergenceofthisgeneralmechanismand
the coherence of patterns across contrasting terrestrial and aquatic
ecosystemssuggestthatbiodiversitylosshasconsistentconsequences
for litterdecomposition andthe cyclingof major elementson broad
spatial scales.
Biologicaldiversitythatdirectlyinfluenceslitterdecompositionexists
at multiple trophic levels4. This diversity includes plants that produce
litter mixtures of varying quality, microbial decomposers and inverteb-
rate consumers of varying body size, the last two of which selectively
use the heterogeneousresources provided bylitter mixtures4,13. General
principlesoftheeffectsofbiodiversityonlitterdecompositionhaveproved
elusive: both pioneering work14 and recent syntheses have highlighted
contrasting effects of litter species richness on decomposition4–6,15,16. In
part, this variation appears to be due to site-specific conditions, includ-
ing contrasts between aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems, as well as bet-
ween geographic settings. Further differences may arise from variation
inexperimental protocols, theplantspeciesstudiedand thetypes of de-
composersincludedinagivenexperiment.Suchmethodologicaldiscrep-
ancieshavecomplicatedsynthesesacrossstudies,hinderingtheemergence
of common patterns and mechanisms.
Here we report the results of the first concerted experiments study-
ing the effects of biodiversity on decomposition by manipulating diver-
sity across trophic levels and distinct biomes in both forest floor and
streamhabitats(ExtendedDataTable1).Weproposedthatthefunctional
diversity of decomposers (variation in body size) and of leaf litter (vari-
ationinlitterquality)promotes CandNcyclingacross contrastingloca-
tions(subarctictotropical)andecosystemtypes(terrestrialversusaquatic).
Bodysize encapsulatesnumerousspecies traitsthatare relevantto eco-
system functioning, and extinction scenarios project that the larger spe-
cieswillbepreferentiallylostfrombiologicalcommunities17,18.Similarly,
plant functional types reflect differences in leaf quality traits that deter-
minelitterdecompositionindependentlyofgeographicallocation19.Plant
functional types are defined here in terms of plant C allocation strat-
egies (deciduous versus evergreen), N acquisition strategies (N-fixing
versus non-N-fixing) and litter recalcitrance (rapidlydecomposing ver-
sus slowly decomposing) (Extended Data Table 2).
Mixingleaflitterfromvariousplantfunctionaltypestogetherresulted
inacceleratedCandNdynamics,asindicatedbytheoverallnetpositive
effects on C and N loss (that is, increased C and N loss with increasing
functional diversity) (Fig. 1, C loss; Extended Data Fig. 1, N loss; P ,
0.05, C and N loss). However, C loss from litter mixtures was only
2.9 6 0.8 mg g21 (mean 6 s.e.m.) of initial litter dry mass greater than
the expected loss based on data from single litter functional types, in-
dicating only a modest increase in C cycling as a result of litter mixing.
Although also statistically significant (P , 0.01), the difference in the
loss of N across all litter mixtures was very small (0.1 6 0.2 mg N g21
of initial litter dry mass; mean 6 s.e.m.; Extended Data Fig. 1). The net
litter diversity effect on C loss was strongerin terrestrial than in aquatic
ecosystems (P , 0.001, Fig. 1 and Extended Data Table 3), supporting
theoreticalpredictions4butcontrastingtheresults of a meta-analysis in
whichdiversityeffectsondecompositionweresignificantonlyforstreams6.
Sorting the litter mixtures into species at the end of the experiments
enabled us to explore potential reasons for this discrepancy, by parti-
tioning the net diversity effects into complementarity effects (that is,
the effects resulting from synergistic or antagonistic interactions) and
selection effects (that is, the effects arising when the presence of a par-
ticular functional type with high (or low) process rates dominates a
mixture)20.Theobservednetdiversityeffectswereclearlydrivenbycom-
plementarity effects that were stronger than selection effects (Fig. 1).
Overall, the complementarity effect was a similar strength to the net
effect for C loss (3.4 6 0.9 mg C g21), and even stronger than the net
effect for N loss (1.0 6 0.2 mg N g21). By contrast, the mean selection
effects were not significant. The characteristics of the forest floor habitat
that may favour complementarity effects include strong fluctuations in
temperature and humidity and a homogenous litter cover4. Conversely,
1Centre d’Ecologie Fonctionnelle et Evolutive (CEFE), CNRS, 1919 Route de Mende, 34293 Montpellier, France. 2De´partement des Sciences Biologiques, Universite´ du Que´bec a` Montre´al, C.P. 8888,
succursale Centre-ville, Montre´al, Que´bec H3C 3P8, Canada. 3Department of Ecological Science, VU University Amsterdam, De Boelelaan 1085, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 4Nature
Conservation and Plant Ecology Group, Wageningen University, Droevendaalsesteeg 3a, 6708 PB Wageningen, The Netherlands. 5Department of Aquatic Ecology, Eawag: Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic
Science and Technology, U¨ berlandstrasse 133, 8600 Du¨bendorf, Switzerland. 6Institute of Integrative Biology (IBZ), ETH Zu¨rich, 8092 Zu¨rich, Switzerland. 7Georg August University Go¨ttingen, J.F.
Blumenbach Institute of Zoology and Anthropology, Berliner Strasse 28, 37073 Go¨ttingen, Germany. 8Universite´ de Toulouse, INP, UPS, EcoLab (Laboratoire Ecologie Fonctionnelle et Environnement), 118
Route de Narbonne, 31062 Toulouse Cedex, France. 9CNRS, EcoLab, 118 Route de Narbonne, 31062 Toulouse Cedex, France. 10Leibniz Institute of Freshwater Ecology and Inland Fisheries (IGB), Alte
Fischerhu¨tte 2, 16775 Stechlin, Germany. 11Department of Ecology, Berlin Institute of Technology (TU Berlin), Ernst-Reuter-Platz 1, 10587 Berlin, Germany. 12Climate Change Programme, Finnish
Environment Institute, PO Box 140, 00251 Helsinki, Finland. 13Department of Ecology and Environmental Science, Umea˚ University, 90187 Umea˚, Sweden. 14Department of Aquatic Sciences and
Assessment, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, PO Box 7050, 75007 Uppsala, Sweden. 15Aquatic Ecology and Water Quality Management Group, Wageningen University, PO Box 47, 6700 AA
Wageningen, The Netherlands. 16Institute of Evolutionary Biology and Environmental Studies & Zu¨rich-Basel Plant Science Center, University of Zu¨rich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, 8057 Zu¨rich, Switzerland.
{Deceased.

the observed negative complementarity effects in subarctic and tropical
streams could reflect a low density and low taxon richness of litter con-
sumers (Extended Data Table 4) and thus limited potential for comple-
mentary resource use21.
Ourexperimentsalsoshowthatcompletenessofthedecomposercom-
munity, which is rarely considered in large-scale studies, is important
for C and N dynamics during litter decomposition (Fig. 2, Table 1 and
Extended Data Table 5). The presence of medium-sized invertebrates
(#1 mmindiameter)inthedecomposercommunityincreasedtheaver-
age C and N loss across all sites by 2.1 6 0.8% and 2.0 6 1.0%, respect-
ively.Thecompletedecomposercommunity(whichincludedorganisms
up to 5 mm in diameter) increased the average C loss across all sites by
10.66 1.0%andtheaverageNlossacrossallsitesby11.16 1.2%(Fig.2).
This effect was consistently positive across all but the Mediterranean
terrestrial site. Thus, the presence of large fauna clearly has a major
impact on decomposition (Table 1), as reported previously22–24; how-
ever, in line with previous studies, the importance of large fauna varies
amonglocationsinaquatic22andterrestrialecosystems23,24.Inourstudy,
the strong effects of the complete decomposer community at the tem-
perate and tropical locations correspond to high relative abundances
of millipedes and termites at the terrestrial temperate and tropical sites,
respectively (Extended Data Table 6). Similarly, the large effect of the
complete decomposer community at the temperate aquatic site corre-
spondstothehighabundanceofaparticularlyefficientamphipoddetri-
tivore (Extended Data Table 4). Our data clearlyindicate thatthe large-
bodiedorganismsarethemostcriticalfordecomposition.Theseanimals
also tend to face the greatest extinction risk17.
Littermixingandcompletenessofthedecomposercommunityinter-
acted with each other to affect C and N loss, although this interaction
explains less of the variance than the main effects (Table 1). C loss and,
even more so, N loss increased in the presence of particular plant func-
tional types and with increasing completeness of the decomposer com-
munity (Table 1 and Extended Data Table 7). Although the type of
decomposer community did not significantly change the net effect of
diversityonCloss(P50.67)orNloss(P50.30)(ExtendedDataTable3),
it emerged as a significant factor in the selection effect for both C loss
(P , 0.05) and N loss (P , 0.05). Additionally, the interaction between
therapidlydecomposinglittertypeandthedecomposercommunitywas
significant inexplainingtheselectioneffectandtheoverallnetdiversity
effect on C loss (P , 0.05) and N loss (P , 0.05), suggesting that large
decomposers are particularly important drivers of C and N loss from
litter mixtures that contain rapidly decomposing litter. The food pre-
ference behaviour of decomposers could be important in accounting
forthisresult,ashaspreviouslybeenimpliedforterrestrial25andaquatic26
ecosystems.
A key result of our large-scale study is that the effects of litter diver-
sityonCandNdynamicscanbelargelyexplainedbythepresenceofpar-
ticular functional planttypes inlittermixtures, supporting theideathat
the range and relative abundance of plant traits in ecosystems underlie
the effects of species richness on ecosystem processes27,28. The effects of
thepresenceoflitterfromparticularplantfunctionaltypes,ortheinter-
actions among these, were consistent across locations at both terrestrial
and aquatic sites, together accounting for about 10% of the total vari-
ance as shown in the full analysis of variance model (Table 1, P , 0.05;
Net diversity effect (mg C g–1 litter) 
–8
0
8
16
–16
Overall SUB BOR TEM MED TRO
Complementarity effect (mg C g–1 litter)
–8
0
8
16
–16
Selection effect (mg C g–1 litter)
–8
0
8
16
–16
Figure 1 | Net diversity, complementarity and selection effects of plant litter
mixtures on C loss. The net diversity effect is the deviation from the expected
mean based on C loss measured from litter consisting of single species. The
blue and brown circles show the mean effects (6s.e.m.) on C loss from litter
mixtures in forest streams and on forest floors, respectively, in subarctic (SUB),
boreal (BOR), temperate (TEM), Mediterranean (MED) and tropical (TRO)
locations. Each circle to the right of the dashed lines shows the mean effect per
ecosystem type (that is, aquatic versus terrestrial), as calculated across the three
types of decomposer community (n 5 165 litter mixtures per location and
ecosystem type; see Extended Data Table 3 for statistical analyses). The circles
to the left of the dashed lines show the overall mean across all locations.
Decomposer community effect (%)
–10
Medium-sized decomposer community
Complete decomposer community
–10
0
10
0
10
20
30
40
50
Average 
N loss: 11%
Average 
C loss: 11%
Average 
N loss: 2%
Average 
C loss: 2%
Aquatic
SUB
BOR
TEM
MED
TRO
SUB
BOR
TEM
MED
TRO
SUB
BOR
TEM
MED
TRO
SUB
BOR
TEM
MED
TRO
Terrestrial
60
–20
Aquatic
Terrestrial
Figure 2 | Effect of decomposer community completeness on litter C and N
loss. C loss (left) and N loss (right) from all litter treatments (all single species
and all mixtures) exposed to medium-sized decomposers (top; percentage
difference comparedwiththe smallestmesh size)andthecompletedecomposer
community (bottom; percentage difference compared with the smallest
mesh size). The blue and brown bars show mean effects (6s.e.m.) in forest
streams and on forest floors, respectively, in the five indicated locations (n 5 45
litter treatments per location per ecosystem type; see Table 1 for statistical
analyses).

Extended Data Table 7). Beyond the presence or absence of particular
plant functional types, we found no significant effect of the richness of
plant functional types in the litter on C loss (P 5 0.93), although a
positive effect was observed on N loss (P , 0.001) (Table 1). The effect
on N loss was strongest when the most complete decomposer com-
munities had access to the litter (litter richness 3 decomposer com-
munity interaction; P , 0.05). Our results indicate that partitioning
the diversity effects into the separate contributions of the presence or
absenceofparticularplantfunctionaltypesinlitterandtheirinteractions
can help move interpretations of biodiversity–ecosystem functioning
experiments beyond the current dichotomy between broad generali-
zations and claims of idiosyncratic compositional effects5,14,15.
An intriguing finding in this context is that the strongest positive in-
teractionemergedbetweentwoparticularlitterfunctionaltypes:N-fixing
plantsandrapidlydecomposingdeciduousplants(ExtendedDataTable7).
When these types were present together in litter mixtures, the average
C loss was 13.5% greater than the average C loss of all litter combina-
tions, and the Nlosswas32.5%greater.This generalpatternholds across
terrestrialandaquaticecosystemsfromthesubarctictothetropics.More-
over, relative to the total amount of N in the litter initially, less N re-
mained in the litter of N-fixing plants when rapidly decomposing litter
was present than when it decomposed alone (Fig. 3 and Extended Data
Table 8). The rapidly decomposing litter, in turn, contained more N
whenlitter from N-fixingplants was present thanwhenit decomposed
alone (Fig. 3 and Extended Data Table 8). On average across all of the
sites, the litter of N-fixing plants lost 20.6% of its initial N when it
decomposed alone but 25.0% when it decomposed in the presence of
litter from rapidly decomposing plants. By contrast, the litter of rapidly
decomposing plants lost 18.1% of its N when it decomposed alone but
13.4% when litter from N-fixing plants was present. This striking pat-
tern across locations and ecosystems suggests, for the first time from
field data, that N can be transferred between litter types. A plausible
mechanism for this effect is that fungal decomposers tap the nutrient
reservoir of the N-fixing plant litter, boosting C use and fungal growth
in the N-deficient litter, which provide high-quality C29 (see section
Extended discussion on litter N transfer in Methods). The average net
differences in N fluxes between single-species litter and litter mixtures
of these two plant functional types account for approximately 0.25 g N
per square metre of ground area, representing up to one-tenth of the
total annual N input from leaf litter fall. Thus, although the biodiver-
sityeffectsthatwereporthere,inlinewithrecentsyntheses9–11,aresmaller
than those noted for other ecosystem processes such as plant biomass
production,thesechangesinNfluxescanhaveimportantconsequences
for the ecosystem. Even slight differences in the N dynamics in litter
mixtures compared withthe respectivesingle-species litter cansubstan-
tially change the N supply to primary producers and other organisms
over large spatial and temporal scales30.
The implications of our results are that changes in C and N cycling
in response to biodiversity loss are largely predictable across vastly dif-
ferent latitudes in both terrestrial and aquaticecosystems,bytakinginto
account relatively simple plant traits and the structural characteristics of
decomposer communities. To provide robust projections of how eco-
systems respond to a loss of biodiversity, it is essential to identify the
mechanisms that result from specific interactions between the compo-
nents of biodiversity as we describe here. With the consistent patterns
and mechanisms of biodiversity effects that we have shown, such pro-
jections now seem to be within reach.
N-fixing
Rapidly decomposing
0.2
0.1
0.0
–0.1
–0.2
SUB
BOR
TEM MED
TRO
SUB
BOR
TEM MED
TRO
Relative net difference in N
Figure 3 | Relative change in the total amount of litter N. The relative net
difference between two-species mixtures (containing litter from the N-fixing
and the rapidly decomposing plants) and monocultures of N-fixing plant litter
(left) or rapidly decomposing plant litter (right) is shown (mean 6 s.e.m.,
n 5 15; see Extended Data Table 8 for statistical analyses) for litter
decomposing in terrestrial (brown) and aquatic (blue) ecosystems at five
locations. The relative net difference was calculated as [(Ni,m 2 Nf,m)/Ni,m] –
[(Ni,a – Nf,a)/Nf,a], where Ni,m and Ni,a are the initial (i), and Nf,m and Nf,a are the
final (f), amounts of N in a particular litter type in a mixture (m) or alone (a).
Table 1 | Variance in C and N loss associated with diversity and sites
Factor
C loss
N loss
DF
%SS
F
P
%SS
F
P
Variation associated with diversity
Litter community: litter richness*
1
0
0
0.93
1.0
63.7
***
Litter community: remaining variation associated with FT composition{
13
10.1
66.0
***
8.9
44.4
***
Decomposer community (small, medium-sized or complete)
2
5.8
247
***
4.4
142
***
Litter community 3 decomposer community
28
0.8
2.45
***
1.3
3.1
***
Variation associated with sites
Location (tropical, Mediterranean, temperate, boreal or subarctic)
4
12.1
52.8
***
16.9
66.5
***
Ecosystem (aquatic stream or terrestrial forest floor)
1
6.4
113
***
1.4
22.3
***
Location 3 ecosystem
4
6.3
27.7
***
8.0
31.6
***
Block (within location 3 ecosystem)
40
2.3
4.87
***
2.5
4.13
***
Variation associated with diversity or sites
Decomposer community 3 location
8
8.6
92.1
***
7.5
61.3
***
Remaining variance
388
27.1
5.95
***
21.4
3.60
***
Total variance explained by the model
489
79.5
13.9
***
73.3
9.76
***
Residuals
1,739
20.4
–
–
26.7
–
–
Total
2,228
100.0
–
–
100.0
–
–
The relative contributions of variance in C and N loss associated with diversity and sites (expressed in percentage sums of squares (% SS)) in a large-scale leaf litter decomposition experiment. The main factors are
italicized. ***, P , 0.001, analysis of variance based on sequential sums of squares (see Methods). See Extended Data Table 5 for details. DF, degrees of freedom; FT, functional type.
* Plant species (trees or shrubs) were selected to represent the same four functional types at each location (N-fixing, evergreen, rapidly decomposing deciduous and slowly decomposing deciduous). Linear
functional type richness was fitted before litter functional type compositions.
{ An alternative model omitting richness and testing in detail the litter functional type compositions in a full factorial analysis with contrasts for functional type presence/absence and interactions is presented in
Extended Data Table 7. That model highlights the importance of the interaction between the litter of the N-fixing functional type and the rapidly decomposing functional type, hinting at a N-transfer mechanism.

METHODS SUMMARY
The field experiments followed an identical protocol at ten sites, encompassing both
aquatic(foreststream)andterrestrial(forestfloor)ecosystemsatfivelocationsacross
a latitudinalgradientspanningfrom thesubarctic to thetropics,withintermediate
locations in boreal, temperate and Mediterranean climates (Extended Data Table 1).
Leaf litter from native tree or shrub species representing four common functional
types (evergreen, deciduous with slowly decomposing litter, deciduous with rapidly
decomposing litter, and N-fixing) that naturally occur across all locations (18 species
intotal;ExtendedDataTable2)wasexposedtodecomposersinatotalof2,250exper-
imentalmicrocosmssetupinthefieldwithallpossiblelocation-specificsingle-species
andmulti-speciescombinations.Weusedarandomizedblock designwithfive blocks
per site. Each block contained 1 replicate of 15 combinations of litter types (that is,
all possible combinations of 4 litter species) 3 3 microcosm mesh sizes (totalling
45 microcosms per block). The three mesh sizes used to construct the field micro-
cosms allowed us to establish three increasingly complete decomposer communities
(small, medium-sized and complete) in the microcosms. Small-sized decomposer
communitiesincluded microorganisms andfaunathatpassedthrough 50-mmand
250-mmmeshscreens(DIATEX)interrestrial and aquatic ecosystems, respectively.
The medium-sized decomposer communities contained all organisms (including
invertebrates) that passedthrough 1-mm mesh screens, whereasthe complete decom-
poser communities included all organisms that passed through 5-mm mesh screens.
Litter mass loss was allowed to proceed to the same defined decomposition stage
(40–50% of the mass of the least recalcitrant litter type remaining at each location;
Extended Data Table 9) to ensure the comparisons of C and N loss, as well as the
effects of diversity, at a similar decomposition stage among sites, using analysis of
variance models (see Methods section).
Online Content Any additional Methods, Extended Data display items and Source
Data are available in the online version of the paper; references unique to these
sections appear only in the online paper.
Received 28 November 2013; accepted 11 March 2014.
1.
Wardle, D. A. Communities and Ecosystems: Linking the Aboveground and
Belowground Components (Princeton Univ. Press, 2002).
2.
Bardgett, R. D. The Biology of Soil: A Community and Ecoystem Approach (Oxford
Univ. Press, 2005).
3.
Parton, W. et al. Global-scale similarities in nitrogen release patterns during long-
term decomposition. Science 315, 361–364 (2007).
4.
Gessner, M. O. et al.Diversity meets decomposition. Trends Ecol. Evol. 25, 372–380
(2010).
5.
Ha¨ttenschwiler,S., Tiunov, A. V. & Scheu, S. Biodiversity and litter decompositionin
terrestrial ecosystems. Annu. Rev. Ecol. Evol. Syst. 36, 191–218 (2005).
6.
Cardinale, B. J. et al. The functional role of producer diversity in ecosystems.
Am. J. Bot. 98, 572–592 (2011).
7.
May, R. M. Why should we be concerned about loss of biodiversity. C. R. Biol. 334,
346–350 (2011).
8.
Naeem, S., Duffy, J. E. & Zavaleta, E. Thefunctions of biological diversity in an age of
extinction. Science 336, 1401–1406 (2012).
9.
Cardinale, B. J. et al. Biodiversity loss and its impact on humanity. Nature 486,
59–67 (2012).
10. Hooper, D. U. et al. A global synthesis reveals biodiversity loss as a major driver of
ecosystem change. Nature 486, 105–108 (2012).
11. Balvanera, P. et al. Quantifying the evidence for biodiversity effects on ecosystem
functioning and services. Ecol. Lett. 9, 1146–1156 (2006).
12. Loreau, M. Linking biodiversity and ecosystems: towards a unifying ecological
theory. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 365, 49–60 (2010).
13. Reiss, J., Bridle, J. R., Montoya, J. M. & Woodward, G. Emerging horizons in
biodiversity research and ecosystem functioning. Trends Ecol. Evol. 24, 505–514
(2009).
14. Wardle, D. A., Bonner, K. I. & Nicholson, K. S. Biodiversity and plant litter:
experimental evidence which does not support the view that enhanced species
richness improves ecosystem function. Oikos 79, 247–258 (1997).
15. Gartner, T. B. & Cardon, Z. G. Decomposition dynamics in mixed-species leaf litter.
Oikos 104, 230–246 (2004).
16. Lecerf, A. et al. Incubation time, functional litter diversity, and habitat
characteristics predict litter-mixing effects on decomposition. Ecology 92,
160–169 (2011).
17. Duffy, J. E. Biodiversity loss, trophic skew and ecosystem functioning. Ecol. Lett. 6,
680–687 (2003).
18. Woodward, G. et al. Body size in ecological networks. Trends Ecol. Evol. 20,
402–409 (2005).
19. Cornwell, W. K. et al. Plant species traits are the predominant control on
litter decomposition rates within biomes worldwide. Ecol. Lett. 11, 1065–1071
(2008).
20. Loreau, M. & Hector, A. Partitioning selection and complementarity in biodiversity
experiments. Nature 412, 72–76 (2001).
21. Frainer, A., McKie, B. G. & Malmqvist, B. When does diversity matter? Species
functional diversity and ecosystem functioning across habitats and seasons in a
field experiment. J. Anim. Ecol. 83, 460–469 (2014).
22. Woodward, G. et al. Continental-scale effects of nutrient pollution on stream
ecosystem functioning. Science 336, 1438–1440 (2012).
23. Wall, D. H. et al. Global decomposition experiment shows soil animal impacts
on decomposition are climate-dependent. Glob. Chang. Biol. 14, 2661–2677
(2008).
24. Garcı´a-Palacios, P., Maestre, F. T., Kattge, J. & Wall, D. H. Climate and litter quality
differently modulate the effects of soil fauna on litter decomposition across
biomes. Ecol. Lett. 16, 1045–1053 (2013).
25. Vos, V. C. A., van Ruijven, J., Berg, M. P., Peeters, E. T. H. M. & Berendse, F. Macro-
detritivore identity drives leaf litter diversity effects. Oikos 120, 1092–1098
(2011).
26. Swan, C. M. & Palmer, M. A. Preferential feeding by an aquatic detritivore mediates
non-additive decomposition of speciose leaf litter. Oecologia 149, 107–114
(2006).
27. Garnier, E. et al. Plant functional markers capture ecosystem properties during
secondary succession. Ecology 85, 2630–2637 (2004).
28. Cadotte, M. W., Carscadden, K. & Mirotchnick, N. Beyond species: functional
diversity and the maintenance of ecological processes and services. J. Appl. Ecol.
48, 1079–1087 (2011).
29. Schimel, J. P. & Ha¨ttenschwiler, S. Nitrogen transfer between decomposing leaves
of different N status. Soil Biol. Biochem. 39, 1428–1436 (2007).
30. Finzi, A. C. & Canham, C. D. Non-additive effects of litter mixtures on net N
mineralization in a southern New England forest. For. Ecol. Manage. 105, 129–136
(1998).
Acknowledgements We thank A. Lecerf and P. Garcı´a-Palacios for comments on the
manuscript. We are grateful to numerous technicians in Montpellier (France) for
building field microcosms, in Du¨bendorf (Switzerland) for water chemical analyses,
and in Du¨bendorf and Go¨ttingen (Germany) for grinding litter samples. We also thank
M. Schindler for assistance, B. Buatois, R. Leclerc, P. Schevin and L. Sonie´ for analyses
performed at the Plate-Forme d’Analyses Chimiques en Ecologie, LabEx CeMEB
(France),G.Larocquefor helpwithR codeandour manycolleaguesatthefieldsites and
research institutes for their support in various ways. This study is part of the BioCycle
research project funded by the European Science Foundation (ESF) as part of its
EUROCORES programme EuroDIVERSITY. BioCycle has been endorsed by
DIVERSITAS as contributing towards their scientific research priorities in biodiversity
science.
Author Contributions All authors contributed to the experimental design, data
acquisition and revision of the final manuscript. Statistical analyses were performed by
I.T.H., B.S., J.V.R. and B.G.M., and the manuscript was written by I.T.H., S.H. and M.O.G.
Author Information Reprints and permissions information is available at www.
nature.com/reprints. The authors declare no competing financial interests. Readers
are welcome to comment on the online version of the paper. Correspondence and
requestsformaterialsshouldbeaddressedtoS.H.(stephan.hattenschwiler@cefe.cnrs.fr).

METHODS
Experimental design. Ourfieldexperimentsfollowedanidenticalprotocolatatotal
of tensites, representingeitheran aquatic ecosystem (foreststream) or a terrestrial
ecosystem (forest floor). Five locations were selected across a broad latitudinal
gradient spanning from the subarctic to the tropics, with intermediate locations in
boreal, temperate and Mediterraneanclimates (Extended DataTable 1).Acrossall
five locations, and in both the stream and forest ecosystems, the experiments con-
sisted of a randomized block design in which the leaf litter from 4 common native
plants (corresponding to the functional types shown in Extended Data Table 2)
and 11 mixtures of these litter types (corresponding to all possible litter combina-
tionswithinalocation)wereenclosedinnylonmeshscreens(DIATEX)andplaced
in the field in five blocks (n 5 5 locations3 2 ecosystem types3 15 litter combi-
nations3 3 mesh sizes3 5 blocks 5 2,250 microcosms). The four functional plant
types represent distinct plant C allocation strategies (deciduous versus evergreen),
Nacquisitionstrategies(NfixerversusnotaNfixer)andlitterrecalcitranceofdecid-
uous non-N-fixers (rapidly decomposing versus slowly decomposing).
The threemesh sizes used to constructthe microcosms enabled usto distinguish
three increasingly complete decomposer communities (small, medium-sized and
complete) that established themselves on the decomposing litter. Small decompo-
sers included microorganisms and small-sized fauna that passed through 50-mm
and250-mmmeshscreensinterrestrialandaquaticsystems,respectively.Themedium-
sized decomposer communities contained all organisms (including invertebrates)
that passed through 1-mm mesh screens, whereas the complete decomposer com-
munities included all decomposers that passed through 5-mm mesh screens. Litter
mass loss was allowedtoproceed tothe samedefineddecomposition stage (40–50%
of the littermassof the least recalcitrantlitter type remainingateach site; Extended
DataTable9)toensuremeaningfulcomparisonsofCandNlossamongallsites.At
alltensites,extramicrocosms containingthe fastest decomposinglitter type served
as benchmark indicators of decomposition rates.
Site characterization. Thefivestreamlocationswerecharacterizedintermsoftheir
geomorphological, physical and chemical features (Extended Data Table 1). Water
samples were collected for chemical analyses at the time of establishing the experi-
ments. Samples for inorganic N and phosphorus determination were filtered over
0.45-mm pore-size cellulose acetate membrane filters and transported to the labor-
atory in a cooler at about 5 uC, where they were frozen for later analysis at Eawag,
Switzerland.
At the five forest sites (Extended Data Table 1), the leaf area index was measured
atbreastheight ona uniformly cloud-covered daywhen the forestcanopy was fully
developed, using an LAI-2000 Plant Canopy Analyzer (LI-COR) for the subarctic
location, anLAI-2200Plant Canopy Analyzer(LI-COR)forthe Mediterraneanand
tropical locations, and a SunScanCanopy Analysis System (DeltaT Devices) for the
temperatelocations.DatafortheboreallocationwereprovidedbyK.Bishop&P.-E.
Mellander.Tocharacterizethe soilat eachof the terrestrialsites,three samplesfrom
each experimental block were taken with a soil corer (5 cm diameter, 10 cm height),
pooled, storedinplasticbagsat4 uC, thensent cooledtotheUniversityofGo¨ttingen
(Germany). Sieved soil samples (,2 mm sieve pore size) were analysed for pH (2 g
soil in 20 ml 0.01 M CaCl2) and C and N concentration (using an NA 1500 Carlo
Erbaelementalanalyser).Themicrobialbiomassofthesoilwasestimatedusingthe
substrate-inducedrespiration(SIR)method.Themicrobialrespiratoryresponsewas
measured in an electrolytic O2-microcompensation apparatus at 22uC. These mea-
surementsweremadehourlyfor24h.Themicrobialbiomasswasmeasuredafterthe
addition of glucose (8 mg C g21 dry soil) as a substrate to saturate the catabolic
activity of the microorganisms. The maximum initial respiratory response (MIRR;
ml O2 g21 dry mass h21) was calculated as the mean of the lowest three readings
within thefirst 10 h, and the microbial biomass was calculated as Cmic 5383MIRR
(in mgCmic g21 soil dry mass).
Dataloggers(SL52T, Signatrol)wereinstalledinsomemicrocosmsatalltensites,
to record the temperature every 2 h. These temperature measurements were taken
in the samelittertreatment for all threemeshsizesin threeof the fiveexperimental
blocks.
Leaf litter collection. A total of 20 litter types were collected at the 5 locations of
our coordinated experiment. This litter corresponded to the same four functional
types per location that were introduced above: N-fixing plants, rapidly decompos-
ing deciduous plants, slowly decomposing deciduous plants and evergreen plants
(Extended Data Table 2).Litterfrom thesefour functional types varies with respect
to several quality traits31 (Extended Data Table 2). The selected species were com-
mon native trees or, in two cases, native woody shrubs (Vaccinium vitis-idaea and
Rhododendron tomentosum) occurring at each location. The litter was collected dur-
ing location-specific leaf senescence either by hand (V. vitis-idaea and R. tomen-
tosum)orbyusinglittertraps.Anexceptionwaslitterfromthetemperateevergreen
speciesIlexaquifolium,whichwasobtainedbycuttingbranchesinthefieldandsim-
ulating senescence in the laboratory for three weeks. Leaves with signs of herbivory
or disease were discarded. The litter from multiple individual trees or shrubs of
each species was pooled and dried at 40 uC.
Leaf litter field incubations. Stream experiments were conducted by exposing 5 g
litterbatchesintetrahedralmeshmicrocosms(17 cm3 25 cm)madeofoneofthree
mesh sizes(250 mm,1 mmor5 mm) toprovideaccess todecomposercommunities
differing in body size. The microcosms were randomly attached (about 40 cm dis-
tancebetweenmicrocosms)tofive20-mmetalchains,eachinaseparateriffle(short,
relatively shallow sections of streams with non-stagnating water) 20 m or farther
apart from each other (experimental blocks). The chains were fixed in the stream
with reinforcing bars in fairly homogeneous sand–gravel stream sections, where
leaves accumulated naturally. All microcosms were submerged at depths sufficient
to ensure that they were not exposed to air when water levels dropped. Care was
takentoexposethelittertoconstantflowconditions,avoidingdeepdepositionalareas
(that is, pools and backwaters) with slow or no flow and rocky riffles with broken
flow.
Terrestrial experiments on the forest floor were conducted by incubating 8 g
location-specific litter (4 g only in the subarctic because of limited litter availability
forsomespecies)infieldmicrocosmsmadeofpolyethylenecylinders(15cmdiam-
eter, 10 cm height) covered with 50-mm mesh at the top and bottom to allow the
passage of water but to prevent the entry of natural litter fall from above and the
loss of small litter particles from the bottom. Two windows (5 cm3 18 cm) were
cut into the cylinders and covered with 50-mm, 1-mm or 5-mm mesh to provide
access to decomposer communities differing in body size. The windows were cut
close to the bottom of the cylinders to ensure that decomposers had access to a
continuous layer of litter outside and inside the microcosms. An additional 1.5-cm
heightplasticring ofthe samediameter asthecylindricalmicrocosms was attached
at the bottom of the microcosm, making it possible to push the microcosms gently
into the top soil (to a depth of 1.5 cm). This ring held the terrestrial microcosms
properlyinplacewhilethebottommeshwasinintimatecontactwiththesoilsurface.
In cases in which pushing the microcosms into the soil was difficult (for example,
in the tropical forest with its dense superficial tree roots), the 1.5-cm rings were
fittedwithaseparateplasticormetalringbeforeplacingthemicrocosms.Themicro-
cosms were separated from each other by at least 50 cm. They were randomly dis-
tributed within blocks that were established at least 20 m apart from each other.
Sample harvest and processing. We removed the decomposing litter of all species
fromthefieldwhen40–50%oftheinitiallittermassofthefastestdecomposingspecies
wasremaining.Asaconsequence,thedurationoflitterdecompositionvariedamong
locationsandecosystemtypes(ExtendedDataTable9).Thisprocedureensuredthat
similar decomposition stages were sampled at all sites, facilitating meaningful com-
parisons of decomposition rates and litter diversity effects. All litter samples were
separated into the constituent species immediately after litter retrieval. The litter
recovered from the streams was gently washed to remove any adhering material
and invertebrates. The litter from the terrestrial sites was cleaned by gently brush-
ing off any dirt without using water, to prevent the leaching of nutrients. The litter
samples were then dried at 65 uC for 48 h. A correction factor was used to convert
the initiallitter mass (weighed after drying at 40 uC) to the finaldry mass, based on
tenrandomlyselectedsamplesperlittertypethatweresuccessivelydriedandweighed
in the laboratory first at 40 uC and then at 65 uC.
Litter C and N loss. The initial C andN concentrationsof each ofthe20 individual
litter types were determined from 5 random samples. The final C and N concen-
trations after retrieval of the litter from the field were also measured for each indi-
vidually sorted litter type from each microcosm. This process resulted in a total of
5,400samplesfor whichto calculate the percentage C and N loss for each litter type
under the various conditions. Following the determination of litter dry mass, all
initialandfinalsamplesweregroundwithaballmill(RetschPM400)toafinehomo-
geneous powder. Subsamples of 3 mg were analysed for C and N concentrations
using a CHN elemental analyser (Flash EA 1112 Series, Thermo Finnigan). C and
N loss (%) from the litter during field exposure was calculated as 100 3 [(Mi 3
CNi) 2 (Mf 3 CNf)] / (Mi 3 CNi), where Mi and Mf are the initial and final litter
dry mass, respectively, and CNi and CNf are the initial and final C or N concen-
tration (% of litter dry mass). Using C loss (%) rather than total litter mass loss
allowed us to correct for any possible inorganic contamination of the litter retrieved
from the field.
Analyses of diversity effects and statistical models. The net diversity effects,
comprising complementarity and selection effects, on both C and N loss were cal-
culated in species mixtures20. The net diversity effect was calculated as the sum of
the complementarity and selection effects and contrasts the actual C and N loss
observed for mixtures of plant functional types with that expected based on the C
and N loss measured in single-species treatments. The net diversity effect repre-
sents the sum of synergistic or antagonistic interactions (that is, complementarity
effects)andthoseduetothepresenceofadominantspecies(thatis,selectioneffects).
Dataweresquare-roottransformed(keepingtheoriginalnegativeandpositivesigns

for the transformed values) to meet the assumptions for the analysis of variance of
net diversity, complementarity and selection effects (see details below).
Analysis of variance models based on sequential sums of squares (type I) were
used to assess the effects of diversity (the richness of plant litter functional types or
thepresenceorabsenceofagivenfunctionaltypeanditsinteractionwithotherfunc-
tionaltypes), the completenessofthedecomposer community (small, mediumand
large (complete)), the location across the latitudinal gradient and the ecosystem
type (terrestrial versus aquatic) on percentage C and N loss. To ensure meaningful
comparisons across the locations, several standardization methods were tested to
remove any variation associated with the differences in incubation length. These
methods included standardizing relative to the following: 1) a standard litter type
from a non-native plant, Ailanthus altissima, that decomposed at all locations dur-
ingthe experiments;2) the overallmean C or N loss per mesh size across locations;
and 3) the mean C or N loss per mesh size of the rapidly decomposing functional
typeacrosslocations. Because the resultswereconsistentirrespectiveofstandardi-
zation, the final model is presented using the non-standardized data.
The model terms were fitted to account for the dependency between the rich-
ness of plant litter functional types and the functional type composition (the pres-
ence orabsenceofagivenfunctionaltypeandinteractionsbetweenfunctionaltypes).
First, functional type composition was partitioned into a contrast for richness and
residualfunctionaltypecomposition(Table 1andExtendedDataTable5).Second,
as shown in Extended Data Table 7, we omitted the richness term and instead re-
solved the functional type composition into a full factorial analysis with contrasts
forfunctionaltype presence or absence and interactions. In this model,the decom-
poser community was fitted as a log–linear contrast (small to large mesh size was
expressed as the logarithm of the mesh size of the microcosms, which produced a
linear relationship of the three mesh sizes). We also removed all of the other non-
significant interaction terms in multiple successive model-fitting steps. These two
alternative analyses reflect different partitionings of the functional type composi-
tion term into contrasts; they allowed us to compare the explanatory power of the
richnesscontrastwiththepresence/absencecontrast.Aperfectlinearrichnesseffect
wouldbe foundifall presence/absencecontrasts hadequalcoefficientsanddid not
interact. In this case, the mean squares or the richness effect with only one degree
of freedom would be much larger than that of the combined mean squares of the
presence/absence main effects of the four litter types withfour degrees of freedom.
In both models, the terms ‘location’ and ‘ecosystem type’ were tested at the block
level. All other terms were tested against the residuals.
A similar analysis of variance approach was used to test independently for the
effects of these same factors on complementarity and selection effects, as well as on
netdiversity effects (ExtendedDataTable 3).Ina separateanalysis of variance(Ex-
tended Data Table 8), we also tested whether the net loss of the total amount of N
relative to the initial amount of N differed when litter of particular plant functional
types(forexample,rapidlydecomposing litterandlitter ofN-fixingplants)decom-
posed together as opposed to decomposing separately, which we interpreted as an
indication of N transfer between litter species. The location and ecosystem type
were also included in this analysis. All statistical analyses were performed with R
software version 2.8.0.
Extended discussion on litter N transfer. Although our data suggest that N was
transferred from the litter of N-fixing plants to rapidlydecomposing litter, alterna-
tive mechanisms cannot be entirely ruled out. In particular, N incorporated into
decomposinglittercan originatenotonly from another co-occurringlitter type but
also from the N pool in the soil or stream water or from microbial N fixation32.
However, N transfer from such alternative N sources does not readily explain the
concomitantreciprocalchangesthatweobservedbetweenthelitterofN-fixingplants
andrapidlydecomposinglitter.Moreover,theideathatNtransferoccurredbetween
the two litter types is further supported by a positive net diversity effect on C loss
that we observed only when these two particular litter functional types were both
present (Extended Data Table 3). Additional support for our interpretation comes
from 15N tracer studies in microcosms with tropical28 and temperate33 forest litter,
which are proof of principle that active biological transfer of N through micro-
organisms, particularly saprotrophic fungi, can occur. Our large-scale field experi-
ment suggests that this phenomenon might be widespread across terrestrial and
aquaticecosystemsandacrossawidevarietyofforesttypesandclimaticconditions.
It had been proposed that N transfer is driven by a gradient in N concentration
between litter types4,5, the rationale being that the element that limits the decom-
positionrateisN.However,thescenarionowunfoldingfromourexperiment(Fig.3)
and the recent isotope tracer studies under laboratory conditions28,33 is that N trans-
fer is stoichiometrically controlled. The crucial determinant that defines the gra-
dient along which N will be transferred in litter mixtures seems to be the demand
forNrelativeto theavailabilityofC(andpossibly thatofother elementscriticalfor
decomposer growth), rather than differences in the N concentration. A litter with
high Cquality favoursrapidmicrobialgrowth, whichinturnentailsahigh demand
for N (and other nutrients), resulting in N acquisition from neighbouring nutrient
pools. In extreme cases, the N source litter may even have a lower N concentration
than the N sink litter33, provided that the C quality of both litter types is sufficiently
different. In accordance with this mechanism, the decomposition of recalcitrant
litter types inourstudy(slowlydecomposingandevergreenplantfunctionaltypes)
was not accelerated by the presence of litter from N-fixing plant species (Extended
Data Table 7), although those recalcitrant litter types had similarly low or lower
initial N concentrations than the rapidly decomposing litter species, which con-
sistently benefited from the presence of N-fixing plant litter.
31.
Makkonen, M. et al. Highly consistent effects of plant litter identity and functional
traits on decomposition across a latitudinal gradient. Ecol. Lett. 15, 1033–1041
(2012).
32.
Vitousek,P.M.& Hobbie,S.Heterotrophicnitrogenfixationindecomposinglitter:
patterns and regulation. Ecology 81, 2366–2376 (2000).
33.
Lummer, D., Scheu, S. & Butenschoen, O. Connecting litter quality, microbial
community and nitrogen transfer mechanisms in decomposing litter mixtures.
Oikos 121, 1649–1655 (2012).
34.
Lepori, F. & Malmqvist, B. Deterministic control on community assembly
peaks at intermediate levels of disturbance. Oikos 118, 471–479
(2009).
35.
Nijboer, R. De Springendalse Beek. Macrofaunagemeeenschappen in de Periode
1970–1995 IBN-rapport 455 (Instituut voor Bos- en Natuuronderzoek,
Wageningen, 1999).

Extended Data Figure 1 | Net diversity, complementarity and selection
effects of plant litter mixtures on N loss. The net diversity effect is the
deviation from the expected mean based on N loss measured from litter
consisting of single species. The blue and brown circles show the mean
effects (6s.e.m.) on N loss from litter mixtures in forest streams and on forest
floors, respectively, in subarctic (SUB), boreal (BOR), temperate (TEM),
Mediterranean (MED) and tropical (TRO) locations. Each circle to the right
of the dashed lines shows the mean effect per ecosystem type (that is, aquatic
versus terrestrial), as calculated across the three types of decomposer
communities (n 5 165 litter mixtures per location and ecosystem type; see
Extended Data Table 3 for statistical analyses). The circles to the left of the
dashed lines show the overall mean across all locations (n 5 825 litter
mixtures per ecosystem type).

Extended Data Table 1 | Characteristics of aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems at five widely dispersed locations
* Means were calculated based on 10-year records between 1998 and 2008 from the closest possible meteorological station.
{ Soluble reactive phosphorus < ortho-phosphate.
{ Data courtesy of K. Bishop and P.-E. Mellander.
1 Soil microbial biomass (Cmic), soil C and soil N are expressed on a dry mass basis.

Extended Data Table 2 | Plant functional types, species identity and litter quality traits
Leaf litter was sampled from location-specific native tree species corresponding to four functional types (top) varying in quality traits associated with decomposition (bottom).
* All data are shown as percentage dry mass (mean 6 s.e.m., n 5 5). Methods are described in detail in ref. 31.

Extended Data Table 3 | Results of analyses of variance testing for the net diversity effect (NE), complementarity effect (CE) and selection
effect (SE) on C loss (top) and N loss (bottom) from decomposing leaf litter*
* Interaction terms omitted from the final model are not significant for any of the three response variables.
{ Location, ecosystem type and their interaction were tested against the block rather than against the residual.

Extended Data Table 4 | Characteristics of stream macroinvertebrate communities at the five tested locations*
* The mean density and total taxon richness of detritivores, their main invertebrate predators, and the mean proportion of Plecoptera, Trichoptera and Gammarus as a percentage of total detritivore abundance
(mean 6 s.d.) are shown. All samples were collected using a 500-mm mesh net at the same time of year as the main experiment (although in different years in some cases). Specific sampling protocols differed
between locations, with the density standardized to the number of individuals per metre squared. For the subarctic site, six replicate kick samples were taken, each from an area of 1 m 3 0.35 m for 1 min, during
September 2006. Identification was mostly to the species level34. For the boreal site, four replicate Surber samples per year were taken for three years, during October 2010–2012, with a quadrat size of
0.25 m 3 0.5 m. Identification was mostly to the species level (B.G.M. and P.-O. Hoffsten, unpublished observations). For the temperate site, five replicate sweep net samples were taken, each from an area of
0.3 m 3 5 m, in October 1992. Identification was mostly to the species level35. For the Mediterranean site, five replicate Surber samples were taken, with a quadrat size of 0.33 m 3 0.31 mm, in January 2014.
Identification was mostly to the family level (E.C. and S. Lamothe, unpublished observations). For the tropical site, ten replicate natural leaf packs (fist-sized handfuls of leaves picked from the stream bed) were
taken from each of seven streams in May 2007. Abundances per leaf pack were converted to densities based on standardized visual estimates of stream-bed litter cover. Identification was mostly to the family level
(A.B., M. Schindler, M. S. Moretti and M.O.G., unpublished observations).
{ Detritivore community composition data do not sum to 100% at all locations, owing to the presence of other dipteran (Tipulidae), lepidopteran (Pyralidae) and crustacean (Asellidae) shredders at the temperate
site, and tipulid and pyralid shredders at the tropical site.
{ The caddisfly Micrasema (Brachycentridae) was common at the Mediterranean site but was small and was not regarded as a shredder.

Extended Data Table 5 | Full model output of the relative contributions of variance associated with diversity and sites to explain C and N loss
Variance associated with diversity and sites is expressed in percentage sums of squares (% SS); levels of significance are *P , 0.05, **P , 0.01, ***P , 0.001.
{ Plant species were selected to represent the same four functional types (FTs) at each location (N-fixing, evergreen, rapidly decomposing deciduous trees or shrubs, or slowly decomposing deciduous trees or
shrubs). Litter FT richness (linear contrast) and litter diversity (factorial contrast) were fitted before litter FT compositions.
{ An alternative model omitting richness and testing in detail the litter FT compositions in a full factorial analysis with contrasts for FT presence/absence and interactions is presented in Extended Data Table 7. That
model highlights the importance of the interaction between the litter of the N-fixing FT and the rapidly decomposing FT, hinting at a N-transfer mechanism.

Extended Data Table 6 | Characteristics of soil fauna communities at the five tested locations*
* The mean density, the total taxon richness and the proportion of dominant taxa as a percentage of total community abundance are shown (mean 6 s.d.). Communities are divided into mesofauna and
macrofauna, reflecting an increase in body size that relates to mesh size differences in the field microcosms.
{ Taxon richness is based on the number of observed families.
{ Dominant taxa data are based on a lower taxonomic resolution than taxon richness, mainly order or class level. The community composition data do not always sum to 100% at all locations, owing to the presence
of other taxa.
1 All samples were collected at the end of the growing season in 2008 (subarctic and boreal, late September; temperate and Mediterranean, October; and tropical, early December). Eight Kempson cores (21-cm
diameter) and eight MacFayden cores (5-cm diameter) were taken at each field site. The reported data are based on extraction of the whole soil core (9-cm height), including the litter layer. Soil arthropods were
extracted, counted and identified to the highest possible taxonomic level (families) (O.B. and S.S., unpublished observations).

Extended Data Table 7 | Analysis of variance testing for effects on total litter C loss (top) and N loss (bottom)
All terms included in the final model shown are significant at P , 0.05.
* The decomposer community was fitted as a log–linear contrast and not a factorial contrast (a factorial contrast is shown in Table 1).
{ The location and ecosystem type and their interaction were tested against the block rather than against the residual.

Extended Data Table 8 | Analysis of variance testing for the proportional change in total litter N content
The test compares specific two-species combinations, including the particular functional types of N-fixing and rapidly decomposing plants, to their respective single-species treatment across location and
ecosystem type.
* A significant difference in the mixture 3 functional type interaction is taken as an indication of N transfer between litter species.
{ Location and ecosystem type and their interaction were also included as factors in this analysis and were tested against the block rather than the residuals.

Extended Data Table 9 | Experimental duration and richness of naturally occurring local litter species in terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems at
each of five widely dispersed locations
* Incubation dates differed across ecosystem types and locations to ensure that, at the time of sampling, 40–50% of the mass of the most rapidly decomposing litter remained, thus allowing comparisons at similar
decomposition stages.
{ The mean species richness counts of naturally occurring litter in five randomly sampled plots that were the size of microcosms (15-cm diameter) in each of the five experimental blocks.
